AN  ANALYSIS 

OF  THE  COMMUNIST  SYSTEM 

by  Milovan  Djilas 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


THE 

NEW  CLASS 


AN  ANALYSIS  OF  THE 
COMMUNIST  SYSTEM 


By 

MILOVAN  DJILAS 


FREDERICK  A.  PRAEGER,  Publisher 
NEW  YORK 


The  Publishers  wish  to  express  their 
gratitude  for  editorial  assistance  to 
Mr.  Morton  Puner  and  Mr.  Konrad  Kellen. 


Seventh  Printing,  October,  1957 


First  published  in  the  United  States  of  America  in  1957 
by  Frederick  A.  Praeger,  inc.,  15  West  47  Street,  New  York  36 
Copyright  ©  1957  in  the  United  States  of  America 
by  Frederick  A.  Praeger,  Inc. 

All  Rights  Reserved 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Cord  Number  57-9496 
Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America 


Preface 


All  this  could  be  told  in  a  different  way:  as  the  history  of  a 
contemporary  revolution,  as  the  expression  of  a  set  of  opinions, 
or  finally,  as  the  confession  of  a  revolutionary.  A  little  of  each 
of  these  may  be  found  in  this  document.  But,  even  if  this  is  an 
inadequate  synthesis  of  history,  opinions  and  memoirs,  it  re¬ 
flects  my  effort  to  give  as  complete  and  as  brief  a  picture  as 
possible  of  contemporary  Communism.  Some  special  or  tech¬ 
nical  aspects  may  be  lost,  but  the  larger  picture,  I  trust,  will  be 
that  much  simpler  and  more  complete. 

I  have  tried  to  detach  myself  from  my  personal  problems  by 
not  submitting  to  them.  My  circumstances  are,  at  best,  un¬ 
certain  and  I  am  therefore  compelled  to  express  my  personal 
observations  and  experiences  hastily;  a  more  detailed  examina¬ 
tion  of  my  personal  situation  might  some  day  supplement  and 
perhaps  even  change  some  of  my  conclusions. 

I  cannot  describe  all  the  dimensions  of  the  conflict  in  the 
painful  course  of  our  contemporary  world.  Nor  do  I  pretend 
to  know  any  world  outside  the  Communist  world,  in  which  I 
had  either  the  fortune  or  misfortune  to  live.  When  I  speak  of 
a  world  outside  my  own,  I  do  so  only  to  put  my  own  world  in 
perspective,  to  make  its  reality  clearer. 


V 


VI 


PREFACE 


Almost  everything  in  this  book  has  been  expressed  some¬ 
where  else,  and  in  a  different  way.  Perhaps  a  new  flavor,  color, 
and  mood,  and  some  new  thoughts,  may  be  found  here.  That 
is  something— in  fact,  quite  enough.  Each  man’s  experiences 
are  unique,  worthy  of  communication  to  his  fellow  men. 

The  reader  should  not  seek  in  this  book  some  kind  of  social 
or  other  philosophy,  not  even  where  I  make  generalized  state¬ 
ments.  My  aim  has  been  to  present  a  picture  of  the  Communist 
world  but  not  to  philosophize  about  it  by  means  of  generaliza¬ 
tions— even  though  I  have  sometimes  found  generalization 
unavoidable. 

The  method  of  detached  observation  seemed  to  me  the  most 
suitable  one  for  presenting  my  material.  My  premises  could 
have  been  strengthened  and  my  conclusions  could  have  been 
proved  by  quotations,  statistics,  and  recitals  of  events.  In  order 
to  be  as  simple  and  concise  as  possible,  I  have  instead  expressed 
my  observations  through  reasoning  and  logical  deduction,  keep¬ 
ing  quotations  and  statistics  to  a  minimum. 

I  think  my  method  is  appropriate  for  my  personal  story  and 
for  my  method  of  working  and  thinking. 

During  my  adult  life  I  have  traveled  the  entire  road  open  to 
a  Communist:  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest  rung  of  the  hier¬ 
archical  ladder,  from  local  and  national  to  international  forums, 
and  from  the  formation  of  the  true  Communist  Party  and 
organization  of  the  revolution  to  the  establishment  of  the  so- 
called  socialist  society.  No  one  compelled  me  to  embrace  or  to 
reject  Communism.  I  made  my  own  decision  according  to  my 
convictions,  freely,  in  so  far  as  a  man  can  be  free.  Even  though 
I  was  disillusioned,  I  do  not  belong  to  those  whose  disillusion¬ 
ment  was  sharp  and  extreme.  I  cut  myself  off  gradually  and 
consciously,  building  up  the  picture  and  conclusions  I  present 
in  this  book.  As  I  became  increasingly  estranged  from  the  re¬ 
ality  of  contemporary  Communism,  I  came  closer  to  the  idea 
of  democratic  socialism.  This  personal  evolution  is  also  reflected 


PREFACE  vii 

in  this  book,  although  the  book’s  primary  purpose  is  not  to 
trace  this  evolution. 

I  consider  it  superfluous  to  criticize  Communism  as  an  idea. 
The  ideas  of  equality  and  brotherhood  among  men,  which 
have  existed  in  varying  forms  since  human  society  began— and 
which  contemporary  Communism  accepts  in  word— are  prin¬ 
ciples  to  which  fighters  for  progress  and  freedom  will  always 
aspire.  It  would  be  wrong  to  criticize  these  basic  ideas,  as  well 
as  vain  and  foolish.  The  struggle  to  achieve  them  Is  part  of 
human  society. 

Nor  have  I  engaged  in  detailed  criticism  of  Communist 
theory,  although  such  criticism  is  needed  and  useful.  I  have 
concentrated  on  a  description  of  contemporary  Communism, 
touching  upon  theory  only  where  necessary. 

It  is  impossible  to  express  all  my  observations  and  exper¬ 
iences  in  a  work  as  brief  as  this  one.  I  have  stated  only  the  most 
essential  of  them,  using  generalizations  where  they  were  un¬ 
avoidable. 

This  account  may  appear  strange  to  those  who  live  in  the 
non-Communist  world;  it  would  not  seem  unusual  to  those  who 
live  in  the  Communist  one:  I  claim  no  exclusive  credit  or  dis¬ 
tinction  for  presenting  the  picture  of  that  world,  nor  for  the 
ideas  concerning  it.  They  are  simply  the  picture  and  ideas  of 
the  world  in  which  I  live.  I  am  a  product  of  that  world.  I  have 
contributed  to  it.  Now  I  am  one  of  its  critics. 

Only  on  the  surface  is  this  inconsistent.  I  have  struggled  in 
the  past,  and  am  struggling  now,  for  a  better  world.  That  strug¬ 
gle  may  not  produce  the  desired  results.  Nevertheless,  the  logic 
of  my  action  is  contained  in  the  length  and  continuity  of  that 
struggle. 


CONTENTS 


Origins 

1 

Character  of  the  Revolution 

15 

The  New  Class 

37 

The  Party  State 

70 

Dogmatism  in  the  Economy 

103 

Tyranny  over  the  Mind 

124 

The  Aim  and  The  Means 

147 

The  Essence 

164 

National  Communism 

173 

The  Present-Day  World 

191 

Origins 

1. 


The  roots  of  modem  Communism  reach  back  very  far,  al¬ 
though  they  were  dormant  before  the  development  of  modem 
industry  in  western  Europe.  Communism’s  basic  ideas  are  the 
Primacy  of  Matter  and  the  Reality  of  Change,  ideas  borrowed 
from  thinkers  of  the  period  just  before  the  inception  of  Com¬ 
munism.  As  Communism  endures  and  gains  strength,  these 
basic  ideas  play  a  less  and  less  important  role.  This  is  under¬ 
standable:  once  in  power.  Communism  tends  to  remodel  the 
rest  of  the  world  according  to  its  otvn  ideas  and  tends  less  and 
less  to  change  itself. 

Dialectics  and  materialism— the  changing  of  the  world  inde¬ 
pendently  of  human  will— formed  the  basis  of  the  old,  classical, 
Marxist  Communism.  These  basic  ideas  were  not  originated 
by  Communist  theorists,  such  as  Marx  or  Engels.  They  bor¬ 
rowed  them  and  wove  them  into  a  whole,  thus  forming, 
unintentionally,  the  basis  for  a  new  conception  of  the  world. 

The  idea  of  the  Primacy  of  Matter  was  borrowed  from  the 
French  materialists  of  the  eighteenth  century.  Earlier  thinkers, 
including  Democritus  in  ancient  Greece,  had  expressed  it  in  a 
different  way.  The  idea  of  the  reality  of  change,  caused  by  the 
struggle  of  oppKJsites,  called  Dialectics,  was  taken  over  from 


1 


2 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


Hegel;  the  same  idea  had  been  expressed  in  a  different  way  by 
Heraclitus  in  ancient  Greece. 

Without  going  into  the  details  of  the  differences  between 
Marxist  ideas  and  preceding  similar  theories,  it  is  necessary  to 
point  out  that  Hegel,  in  presenting  the  idea  of  the  Reality  of 
Change,  retained  the  concept  of  an  unchanging  supreme  law, 
or  the  Idea  of  the  Absolute.  As  he  expressed  it,  in  the  last  analy¬ 
sis  there  are  unchangeable  laws  which,  independently  of  human 
will,  govern  nature,  society,  and  human  beings. 

Although  stressing  the  idea  of  the  Reality  of  Change,  Marx, 
and  especially  Engels,  stated  that  the  laws  of  the  objective  or 
material  world  were  unchangeable  and  independent  of  human 
beings.  Marx  was  certain  that  he  would  discover  the  basic  laws 
governing  life  and  society,  just  as  Darwin  had  discovered  the 
laws  governing  living  creatures.  At  any  rate,  Marx  did  clarify 
some  social  laws,  particularly  the  way  in  which  these  laws 
operated  in  the  period  of  early  industrial  capitalism. 

This  fact  alone,  even  if  accepted  as  accurate,  cannot  in  itself 
justify  the  contention  of  modem  Communists  that  Marx  dis¬ 
covered  all  the  laws  of  society.  Still  less  can  it  justify  their  at¬ 
tempt  to  model  society  after  those  ideas  in  the  same  way  that 
livestock  is  bred  on  the  basis  of  the  discoveries  of  Lamarck  and 
Darwin.  Human  society  cannot  be  compared  to  species  of  ani¬ 
mals  or  to  inanimate  objects;  it  is  composed  of  individuals  and 
groups  which  are  continuously  and  consciously  active  in  it, 
growing  and  changing. 

In  the  pretensions  of  contemporary  Communism  of  being, 
if  not  the  unique  and  absolute,  but  in  any  case  the  highest 
science,  based  on  dialectical  materialism,  are  hidden  the  seeds 
of  its  despotism.  The  origin  of  these  pretensions  can  be  found 
in  the  ideas  of  Marx,  though  Marx  himself  did  not  anticipate 
them. 

Of  course,  contemporary  Communism  does  not  deny  the 
existence  of  an  objective  or  unchanging  body  of  laws.  However, 
when  in  power,  it  acts  in  an  entirely  different  manner  toward 


ORIGINS 


3 


human  society  and  the  individual,  and  uses  methods  to  estab¬ 
lish  its  power  different  from  those  its  theories  would  suggest. 

Beginning  with  the  premise  that  they  alone  know  the  laws 
which  govern  society,  Communists  arrive  at  the  oversimplified 
and  unscientific  conclusion  that  this  alleged  knowledge  gives 
them  the  power  and  the  exclusive  right  to  change  society  and 
to  control  its  activities.  This  is  the  major  error  of  their  system. 

Hegel  claimed  that  the  absolute  monarchy  in  Prussia  was 
the  incarnation  of  his  idea  of  the  Absolute.  The  Communists, 
on  the  other  hand,  claim  that  they  represent  the  incarnation 
of  the  objective  aspirations  of  society.  Here  is  more  than  just 
one  difference  between  the  Communists  and  Hegel;  there  is 
also  a  difference  between  the  Communists  and  absolute  mon¬ 
archy.  The  monarchy  did  not  think  quite  as  highly  of  itself  as 
the  Communists  do  of  themselves,  nor  was  it  as  absolute  as 
they  are. 


2. 


Hegel  himself  was  probably  troubled  by  the  possible  con¬ 
clusions  to  be  drawn  from  his  own  discoveries.  For  instance, 
if  everything  was  constantly  being  transformed,  what  would 
happen  to  his  own  ideas  and  to  the  society  which  he  wanted 
to  preserve?  As  a  professor  by  royal  appointment  he  could 
not  have  dared,  in  any  case,  to  make  public  recommendations 
for  the  improvement  of  society  on  the  basis  of  his  philosophy. 

This  was  not  the  case  with  Marx.  As  a  young  man  he  took 
an  active  part  in  the  1848  revolution.  He  went  to  extremes  in 
drawing  conclusions  from  Hegel’s  ideas.  Was  not  the  bloody 
class  struggle  raging  all  over  Europe  straining  toward  something 
new  and  higher?  It  appeared  not  only  that  Hegel  was  right— 
that  is,  Hegel  as  interpreted  by  Marx— but  also  that  philo¬ 
sophical  systems  no  longer  had  meaning  and  justification,  since 
science  was  discovering  objective  laws  so  rapidly,  including 
those  applicable  to  society. 


4 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


In  science,  Comte’s  positivism  had  already  triumphed  as  a 
method  of  inquiry;  the  English  school  of  political  economy 
(Smith,  Ricardo,  and  others)  was  at  its  height;  epochal  laws 
were  being  discovered  from  day  to  day  in  the  natural  sciences; 
modern  industry  was  carving  out  its  path  on  the  basis  of  scien¬ 
tific  technology;  and  the  wounds  of  young  capitalism  revealed 
themselves  in  the  suffering  and  the  beginning  struggle  of  the 
proletariat.  Apparently  this  was  the  onset  of  the  domination 
of  science,  even  over  society,  and  the  elimination  of  the  capital¬ 
istic  concept  of  ownership  as  the  final  obstacle  to  human  happi¬ 
ness  and  freedom. 

The  time  was  ripe  for  one  great  conclusion.  Marx  had  both 
the  daring  and  the  depth  to  express  it,  but  there  were  no  social 
forces  available  on  which  he  could  rely. 

Marx  was  a  scientist  and  an  ideologist.  As  a  scientist,  he  made 
important  discoveries,  particularly  in  sociology.  As  an  ideol¬ 
ogist,  he  furnished  the  ideological  basis  for  the  greatest  and 
most  important  political  movements  of  modern  history,  which 
took  place  first  in  Europe  and  are  now  taking  place  in  Asia. 

But,  just  because  he  was  a  scientist,  economist,  and  sociol¬ 
ogist,  Marx  never  thought  of  constructing  an  all-inclusive 
philosophical  or  ideological  system.  He  once  said:  “One  thing 
is  certain;  I  am  not  a  Marxist.”  His  great  scientific  talent  gave 
him  the  greatest  advantage  over  all  his  socialist  predecessors, 
such  as  Owen  and  Fourier.  The  fact  that  he  did  not  insist  on 
ideological  all-inclusiveness  or  his  own  philosophical  system 
gave  him  an  even  greater  advantage  over  his  disciples.  Most  of 
the  latter  were  ideologists  and  only  to  a  very  limited  degree— 
as  the  examples  of  Plekhanov,  Labriola,  Lenin,  Kautsky,  and 
Stalin  will  show— scientists.  Their  main  desire  was  to  construct 
a  system  out  of  Marx’s  ideas;  this  was  especially  true  of  those 
who  knew  litde  philosophy  and  had  even  less  talent  for  it.  As  the 
time  passed,  Marx’s  successors  revealed  a  tendency  to  present 
his  teachings  as  a  finite  and  all-inclusive  concept  of  the  world, 
and  to  regard  themselves  as  responsible  for  the  continuation 


ORIGINS 


5 


of  all  of  Marx’s  work,  which  they  considered  as  being  virtually 
complete.  Science  gradually  yielded  to  propaganda,  and  as  a 
result,  propaganda  tended  more  and  more  to  represent  itself 
as  science. 

Being  a  product  of  his  time,  Marx  denied  the  need  for  any 
kind  of  philosophy.  His  closest  friend,  Engels,  declared  that 
philosophy  had  died  with  the  development  of  science.  Marx’s 
thesis  was  not  at  all  original.  The  so-called  scientific  philosophy, 
especially  after  Comte’s  positivism  and  Feuerbach’s  mater¬ 
ialism,  had  become  the  general  fashion. 

It  is  easy  to  understand  tvhy  Marx  denied  both  the  need  for 
and  the  possibility  of  establishing  any  kind  of  philosophy.  It 
is  harder  to  understand  why  his  successors  tried  to  arrange  his 
ideas  into  an  all-inclusive  system,  into  a  new,  exclusive  philos¬ 
ophy.  Even  though  they  denied  the  need  for  any  kind  of 
philosophy,  in  practice  they  created  a  dogma  of  their  otvn  which 
they  considered  to  be  the  “most  scientific”  or  the  “only  scien¬ 
tific”  system.  In  a  period  of  general  scientific  enthusiasm  and 
of  great  changes  brought  about  in  everyday  life  and  industry 
by  science,  they  could  not  help  but  be  materialists  and  to 
consider  themselves  the  “only”  representatives  of  the  “only” 
scientific  view  and  method,  particularly  since  they  represented 
a  social- stratum  which  was  in  conflict  with  all  the  accepted 
ideas  of  the  time. 

Marx’s  ideas  -were  influenced  by  the  scientific  atmosphere  of 
his  time,  by  his  otvn  leanings  toward  science,  and  by  his  revolu¬ 
tionary  aspiration  to  give  to  the  working-class  movement  a 
more  or  less  scientific  basis.  His  disciples  were  influenced 
by  a  different  environment  and  by  different  motives  when  they 
converted  his  views  into  dogma. 

If  the  political  needs  of  the  working-class  movement  in 
Europe  had  not  demanded  a  new  ideology  complete  in  itself, 
the  philosophy  that  calls  itself  Marxist,  the  dialectical  material¬ 
ism,  would  have  been  forgotten— dismissed  as  something  not 
particularly  profound  or  even  original,  though  Marx’s  eco- 


6 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


nomic  and  social  studies  are  of  the  highest  scientific  and  literary 
rank. 

The  strength  of  Marxist  philosophy  did  not  lie  in  its  scien¬ 
tific  elements,  but  in  its  connection  with  a  mass  movement,  and 
most  of  all  in  its  emphasis  on  the  objective  of  changing  society. 
It  stated  again  and  again  that  the  existing  world  would  change 
simply  because  it  had  to  change,  that  it  bore  the  seeds  of  its 
own  opposition  and  destruction;  that  the  working  class  wanted 
this  change  and  would  be  able  to  effect  it.  Inevitably,  the  influ¬ 
ence  of  this  philosophy  increased  and  created  in  the  European 
working-class  movement  the  illusion  that  it  was  omnipotent, 
at  least  as  a  method.  In  countries  where  similar  conditions  did 
not  exist,  such  as  Great  Britain  and  the  United  States,  the 
influence  and  importance  of  this  philosophy  was  insignificant, 
despite  the  strength  of  the  working  class  and  the  working-class 
movement. 

As  a  science,  Marxist  philosophy  was  not  important,  since  it 
was  based  mainly  on  Hegelian  and  materialistic  ideas.  As  the 
ideology  of  the  new,  oppressed  classes  and  especially  of  political 
movements,  it  marked  an  epoch,  first  in  Europe,  and  later  in 
Russia  and  Asia,  providing  the  basis  for  a  new  political  move¬ 
ment  and  a  new  social  system. 


3. 


Marx  thought  that  the  replacement  of  capitalist  society 
would  be  brought  about  by  a  revolutionary  struggle  between 
its  two  basic  classes,  the  bourgeoisie  and  the  proletariat.  The 
clash  seemed  all  the  more  likely  to  him  because  in  the  capital¬ 
istic  system  of  that  time  both  poverty  and  wealth  kept  increas¬ 
ing  unchecked,  on  the  opposite  poles  of  a  society  that  was 
shaken  by  periodic  economic  crises. 

In  the  last  analysis,  Marxist  teaching  was  the  product  of  the 


ORIGINS 


7 


industrial  revolution  or  of  the  struggle  of  the  industrial  prole¬ 
tariat  for  a  better  life.  It  was  no  accident  that  the  frightful 
poverty  and  brutalization  of  the  masses  which  accompanied  in¬ 
dustrial  change  had  a  powerful  influence  on  Marx.  His  most 
important  work.  Das  Kapital,  contains  a  number  of  important 
and  stirring  pages  on  this  topic.  The  recurring  crises,  which 
were  characteristic  of  the  capitalism  of  the  nineteenth  century, 
together  with  the  poverty  and  the  rapid  increase  of  the  popula¬ 
tion,  logically  led  Marx  to  the  belief  that  revolution  was  the 
only  solution.  Marx  did  not  consider  revolution  to  be  inevita¬ 
ble  in  all  countries,  particularly  not  in  those  where  democratic 
institutions  were  already  a  tradition  of  social  life.  He  cited  as 
examples  of  such  countries,  in  one  of  his  talks,  the  Netherlands, 
Great  Britain  and  the  United  States.  However,  one  can  con¬ 
clude  from  his  ideas,  taken  as  a  whole,  that  the  inevitability 
of  revolution  was  one  of  his  basic  beliefs.  He  believed  in  revo¬ 
lution  and  preached  it;  he  was  a  revolutionary. 

Marx’s  revolutionary  ideas,  which  were  conditional  and  not 
universally  applicable,  were  changed  by  Lenin  into  absolute  and 
universal  principles.  In  The  Infantile  Disorder  of  “Left-Wing" 
Communism,  perhaps  his  most  dogmatic  work,  Lenin  devel¬ 
oped  these  principles  still  more,  differing  with  Marx’s  position 
that  revolution  was  avoidable  in  certain  countries.  He  said  that 
Great  Britain  could  no  longer  be  regarded  as  a  country  in 
which  revolution  was  avoidable,  because  during  the  First 
World  War  she  had  become  a  militaristic  power,  and  therefore 
the  British  working  class  had  no  other  choice  but  revolution. 
Lenin  erred,  not  only  in  his  failure  to  understand  that  “British 
militarism”  was  only  a  temporary,  wartime  phase  of  develop¬ 
ment,  but  because  he  failed  to  foresee  the  further  development 
of  democracy  and  economic  progress  in  Great  Britain  or  other 
Western  countries.  He  also  did  not  understand  the  nature  of 
the  English  trade-union  movement.  He  placed  too  much  em¬ 
phasis  on  his  own,  or  Marxian,  deterministic,  scientific  ideas 
and  paid  too  little  attention  to  the  objective  social  role  and 


8 


THE  NEW  CLASS. 


potentialities  of  the  working  class  in  more  highly  developed 
countries.  Although  he  disclaimed  it,  he  did  in  fact  proclaim 
his  theories  and  the  Russian  revolutionary  experience  to  be 
universally  applicable. 

According  to  Marx’s  hypothesis  and  his  conclusions  on  the 
subject,  the  revolution  would  occur  first  of  all  in  the  highly 
developed  capitalist  countries.  Marx  believed  that  the  results 
of  the  revolution— that  is,  the  new  socialist  society— would  lead 
to  a  new  and  higher  level  of  freedom  than  that  prevalent  in 
the  existing  society,  in  so<alled  liberal  capitalism.  This  is 
understandable.  In  the  very  act  of  rejecting  various  types  of 
capitalism,  Marx  was  at  the  same  time  a  product  of  his  epoch, 
the  liberal  capitalist  epoch. 

In  developing  the  Marxist  stand  that  capitalism  must  be  re¬ 
placed  not  only  by  a  higher  economic  and  social  form— that  is, 
socialism— but  by  a  higher  form  of  human  freedom,  the  Social 
Democrats  justifiably  considered  themselves  to  be  Marx’s  suc¬ 
cessors.  They  had  no  less  right  to  this  claim  than  the  Com¬ 
munists,  who  cited  Marx  as  the  source  of  their  idea  that  the 
replacement  of  capitalism  can  take  place  only  by  revolutionary 
means.  However,  both  groups  of  Marx’s  followers— the  Social 
Democrats  and  the  Communists— were  only  partly  right  in  cit¬ 
ing  him  as  the  basis  for  their  ideas.  In  citing  Marx’s  ideas  they 
were  defending  their  own  practices,  which  had  originated  in  a 
different,  and  already  changed  society.  And,  although  both 
cited  and  depended  on  Marxist  ideas,  the  Social  Democratic  and 
Communist  movements  developed  in  different  directions. 

In  countries  where  political  and  economic  progress  was  dif¬ 
ficult,  and  where  the  working  class  played  a  weak  role  in  society, 
the  need  arose  slowly  to  make  a  system  and  a  dogma  out  of 
Marxist  teaching.  Moreover,  in  countries  where  economic  forces 
and  social  relations  were  not  yet  ripe  for  industrial  change,  as  in 
Russia  and  later  in  China,  the  adoption  and  dogmatization  of 
the  revolutionary  aspects  of  Marxist  teachings  was  more  rapid 
and  complete.  There  was  emphasis  on  revolution  by  the  work- 


ORIGINS 


9 


ing-class  movement.  In  such  countries,  Marxism  grew  stronger 
and  stronger  and,  with  the  victory  of  the  revolutionary  party,  it 
became  the  dominant  ideology. 

In  countries  such  as  Germany,  where  the  degree  of  political 
and  economic  progress  made  revolution  unnecessary,  the  demo¬ 
cratic  and  reformist  aspects  of  Marxist  teaching,  rather  than 
the  revolutionary  ones,  dominated.  The  anti-dogmatic  ideologi¬ 
cal  and  political  tendencies  generated  an  emphasis  on  reform 
by  the  working-class  movement. 

In  the  first  case,  the  ties  with  Marx  were  strengthened,  at 
least  in  outward  appearance.  In  the  second  case,  they  were 
weakened. 

Social  development  and  the  development  of  ideas  led  to  a 
severe  schism  in  the  European  socialist  movement.  Roughly 
speaking,  the  changes  in  political  and  economic  conditions  co¬ 
incided  with  changes  in  the  ideas  of  the  socialist  theorists, 
because  they  interpreted  reality  in  a  relative  manner,  that  is, 
in  an  incomplete  and  one-sided  way,  from  their  own  partisan 
point  of  view. 

Lenin  in  Russia  and  Bernstein  in  Germany  are  the  two  ex¬ 
tremes  through  which  the  different  changes,  social  and  eco¬ 
nomic,  and  the  different  “realities”  of  the  working-class  move¬ 
ments  found  expression. 

Almost  nothing  remained  of  original  Marxism.  In  the  West 
it  had  died  out  or  was  in  the  process  of  dying  out;  in  the  East, 
as  a  result  of  the  establishment  of  Communist  rule,  only  a  res¬ 
idue  of  formalism  and  dogmatism  remained  of  Marx’s  dialectics 
and  materialism;  this  was  used  for  the  purpose  of  cementing 
power,  justifying  tyranny,  and  violating  human  conscience. 
Although  it  had  in  fact  also  been  abandoned  in  the  East,  Marx¬ 
ism  operated  there  as  a  rigid  dogma  with  increasing  power.  It 
was  more  than  an  idea  there;  it  was  a  new  government,  a  new 
economy,  a  new  social  system. 

Although  Marx  had  furnished  his  disciples  with  the  impetus 
for  such  development,  he  had  very  little  desire  for  such  develop- 


10  THE  NEW  CLASS. 

ment  nor  did  he  expect  it.  History  betrayed  this  great  master 
as  it  has  others  who  have  attempted  to  interpret  its  laws. 

What  has  been  the  nature  of  the  development  since  Marx? 

In  the  1870’s,  the  formation  of  corporations  and  monopolies 
had  begun  in  countries  where  the  industrial  revolution  had 
already  taken  place,  such  as  Germany,  England,  and  the  United 
States.  This  development  was  in  full  swing  by  the  beginning 
of  the  twentieth  century.  Scientific  analyses  were  made  of  it 
by  Hobson,  Hilferding,  and  others.  Lenin,  in  Imperialism,  the 
Final  Stage  of  Capitalism,  made  a  political  analysis,  based 
mainly  on  these  authors,  containing  predictions  which  have 
proved  mostly  inaccurate. 

Marx’s  theories  about  the  increasing  impoverishment  of  the 
working  class  were  not  borne  out  by  developments  in  those 
countries  from  which  his  theories  had  been  derived.  However, 
as  Hugh  Seton-Watson  states  in  From  Lenin  to  Malenkov,* 
they  appeared  to  be  reasonably  accurate  for  the  most  part  in 
the  case  of  the  agrarian  East  European  countries.  Thus,  while 
in  the  West  his  stature  was  reduced  to  that  of  a  historian  and 
scholar,  Marx  became  the  prophet  of  a  new  era  in  eastern 
Europe.  His  teachings  had  an  intoxicating  effect,  similar  to  a 
new  religion. 

The  situation  in  western  Europe  that  contributed  to  the 
theories  of  Engels  and  Marx  is  described  by  Andr6  Maurois  in 
the  Yugoslav  edition  of  The  History  of  England: 

When  Engels  visited  Manchester  in  1844,  he  found  350,000 
workers  crushed  and  crowded  into  damp,  dirty,  broken-down 
houses  where  they  breathed  an  atmosphere  resembling  a  mix¬ 
ture  of  water  and  coal.  In  the  mines,  he  saw  half-naked 
women,  who  were  treated  like  the  lowest  of  draft  animals. 
Children  spent  the  day  in  dark  tunnels,  where  they  were 
employed  in  opening  and  closing  the  primitive  openings  for 
ventilation,  and  in  other  difficult  tasks.  In  the  lace  industry, 
exploitation  reached  such  a  point  that  four-year-old  children 
worked  for  virtually  no  pay. 

^’New  York,  Frederick  A.  Praeger,  1953, 


ORIGINS 


11 


Engels  lived  to  see  an  entirely  different  picture  of  Great 
Britain,  but  he  saw  a  still  more  horrible  and— what  is  more 
important— hopeless  poverty  in  Russia,  the  Balkans,  Asia  and 
Africa. 

Technological  improvements  brought  about  vast  and  con¬ 
crete  changes  in  the  West,  immense  from  every  point  of  view. 
They  led  to  the  formation  of  monopolies,  and  to  the  partition 
of  the  world  into  spheres  of  interest  for  the  developed  countries 
and  for  the  monopolies.  They  also  led  to  the  First  World  War 
and  the  October  Revolution. 

In  the  developed  countries  the  rapid  rise  in  production  and 
the  acquisition  of  colonial  sources  of  materials  and  markets 
materially  changed  the  position  of  the  working  class.  The  strug¬ 
gle  for  reform,  for  better  material  conditions,  together  with 
the  adoption  of  parliamentary  forms  of  government,  became 
more  real  and  valuable  than  revolutionary  ideals.  In  such  places 
revolution  became  nonsensical  and  unrealistic. 

The  countries  which  were  not  yet  industrialized,  particularly 
Russia,  were  in  an  entirely  different  situation.  They  found 
themselves  in  a  dilemma;  they  had  either  to  become  industrial¬ 
ized,  or  to  discontinue  active  participation  on  the  stage  of 
history,  turning  into  captives  of  the  developed  countries  and 
their  monopolies,  thus  doomed  to  degeneracy.  Local  capital 
and  the  class  and  parties  representing  it  were  too  weak  to  solve 
the  problems  of  rapid  industrialization.  In  these  countries  revo¬ 
lution  became  an  inescapable  necessity,  a  vital  need  for  the  na¬ 
tion,  and  only  one  class  could  bring  it  about— the  proletariat, 
or  the  revolutionary  party  representing  it. 

The  reason  for  this  is  that  there  is  an  immutable  law— that 
each  human  society  and  all  individuals  participating  in  it  strive 
to  increase  and  perfect  production.  In  doing  this  they  come  in 
conflict  with  other  societies  and  individuals,  so  that  they  com¬ 
pete  with  each  other  in  order  to  survive.  This  increase  and 
expansion  of  production  constantly  faces  natural  and  social 
barriers,  such  as  individual,  political,  legal,  and  international 


THE  NEW  CLASS. 


12 

customs  and  relationships.  Since  it  must  overcome  obstacles, 
society,  that  is,  those  who  at  a  given  moment  represent  its 
productive  forces,  must  eliminate,  change,  or  destroy  the  ob¬ 
stacles  which  arise  either  inside  or  outside  its  boundaries. 
Classes,  parties,  political  systems,  political  ideas,  are  an  expres¬ 
sion  of  this  ceaseless  pattern  of  movement  and  stagnation. 

No  society  or  nation  allows  production  to  lag  to  such  an 
extent  that  its  existence  is  threatened.  To  lag  means  to  die. 
People  never  die  willingly;  they  are  ready  to  undergo  any  sacri¬ 
fice  to  overcome  the  difficulties  which  stand  in  the  way  of  their 
economic  production  and  their  existence. 

The  environment  and  the  material  and  intellectual  level  de¬ 
termine  the  method,  forces,  and  means  that  will  be  used  to 
bring  about  the  development  and  expansion  of  production, 
and  the  social  results  which  follow.  However,  the  necessity  for 
the  development  and  expansion  of  production— under  any  ideo¬ 
logical  banner  or  social  force— does  not  depend  on  individuals; 
because  they  wish  to  survive,  societies  and  nations  find  the 
leaders  and  ideas  which,  at  a  given  moment,  are  best  suited  to 
that  which  they  must  and  wish  to  attain. 

Revolutionary  Marxism  was  transplanted  during  the  period 
of  monopolistic  capitalism  from  the  industrially  developed 
West  to  countries  of  the  industrially  undeveloped  East,  such  as 
Russia  and  China.  This  is  about  the  time  when  socialist  move¬ 
ments  were  developing  in  the  East  and  West.  This  stage 
of  the  socialist  movement  began  with  its  unification  and  central¬ 
ization  in  the  Second  International,  and  ended  with  a  division 
into  the  Social  Democratic  (reform)  wing  and  the  Communist 
(revolutionary)  wing,  leading  to  the  revolution  in  Russia  and 
the  formation  of  the  Third  International. 

In  countries  where  there  tvas  no  other  way  of  bringing  about 
industrialization,  there  were  special  national  reasons  for  the 
Communist  revolution.  Revolutionary  movements  existed  in 
semi-feudal  Russia  over  half  a  century  before  the  appearance 
of  the  Marxists  in  the  late  nineteenth  century.  Moreover,  there 


ORIGINS 


13 


were  urgent  and  specific  concrete  reasons— international,  eco¬ 
nomic,  political— for  revolution.  The  basic  reason— the  vital 
need  for  industrial  change— was  common  to  all  the  countries 
such  as  Russia,  China,  and  Yugoslavia,  where  revolution  took 
place. 

It  was  historically  inevitable  that  most  of  the  European 
socialist  movements  after  Marx  were  not  only  materialistic  and 
Marxist,  but  to  a  considerable  degree  ideologically  exclusive. 
Against  them  were  united  all  the  forces  of  the  old  society: 
church,  school,  private  otvnership,  government  and,  more  im¬ 
portant,  the  vast  power  machinery  which  the  European  coun¬ 
tries  had  developed  since  early  times  in  the  face  of  the  constant 
continental  wars. 

Anyone  who  wants  to  change  the  world  fundamentally  must 
first  of  all  interpret  it  fundamentally  and  “without  error.” 
Every  new  movement  must  be  ideologically  exclusive,  especially 
if  revolution  is  the  only  way  victory  can  be  won.  And  if  tliis 
movement  is  successful,  its  very  success  must  strengthen  its  be¬ 
liefs  and  ideas.  Though  successes  through  “adventurous”  par¬ 
liamentary  methods  and  strikes  strengthened  the  reformist  trend 
in  the  German  and  other  Social  Democratic  parties,  the  Russian 
workers,  who  could  not  improve  their  position  by  one  kopeck 
without  bloody  liquidations,  had  no  choice  but  to  use  weapons 
to  escajre  despair  and  death  by  starvation. 

The  other  countries  of  eastern  Europe— Poland,  Czecho¬ 
slovakia,  Hungary,  Rumania,  and  Bulgaria— do  not  fall  under 
this  rule,  at  least  not  the  first  three  countries.  They  did  not 
experience  a  revolution,  since  the  Communist  system  was  im¬ 
posed  on  them  by  the  power  of  the  Soviet  Army.  They  did  not 
even  press  for  industrial  change,  at  least  not  by  the  Communist 
method,  for  some  of  them  had  already  attained  it.  In  these 
countries,  revolution  was  imposed  from  the  outside  and  from 
above,  by  foreign  bayonets  and  the  machinery  of  force.  The 
Communist  movements  were  weak,  except  in  the  most  devel¬ 
oped  of  the  countries,  Czechoslovakia,  where  the  Communist 


14  THE  NEW  CLASS 

movement  had  closely  resembled  leftist  and  parliamentary 
socialist  movements  up  to  the  time  of  direct  Soviet  intervention 
in  the  war  and  the  coup  d’etat  of  February  1948.  Since  the  Com¬ 
munists  in  these  countries  were  weak,  the  substance  and  form 
of  their  Communism  had  to  be  identical  with  that  of  the 
U.S.S.R.  The  U.S.S.R.  imposed  its  system  on  them,  and  the 
domestic  Communists  adopted  it  gladly.  The  weaker  Com¬ 
munism  was,  the  more  it  had  to  imitate  even  in  form  its  “big 
brother”— totalitarian  Russian  Communism. 

Countries  such  as  France  and  Italy,  which  had  relatively 
strong  Communist  movements,  had  a  hard  time  keeping  up 
with  the  industrially  better-developed  countries,  and  thus  ran 
into  social  difficulties.  Since  they  had  already  passed  through 
democratic  and  industrial  revolutions,  their  Communist  move¬ 
ments  differed  greatly  from  those  in  Russia,  Yugoslavia,  and 
China.  Therefore,  in  France  and  Italy  revolution  did  not  have 
a  real  chance.  Since  they  were  living  and  operating  in  an  envi¬ 
ronment  of  political  democracy,  even  the  leaders  of  their  Com¬ 
munist  parties  were  not  able  to  free  themselves  entirely  of  par¬ 
liamentary  illusions.  As  far  as  revolution  was  concerned,  they 
tended  to  rely  more  on  the  international  Communist  move¬ 
ment  and  the  aid  of  the  U.S.S.R  than  on  their  own  revolutionary 
power.  Their  followers,  considering  their  leaders  to  be  fighters 
against  poverty  and  misery,  naively  believed  that  the  party  was 
fighting  for  a  broader  and  truer  democracy. 

Modern  Communism  began  as  an  idea  with  the  inception  of 
modem  industry.  It  is  dying  out  or  being  eliminated  in  those 
countries  where  industrial  development  has  achieved  its  basic 
aims.  It  flourishes  in  those  countries  where  this  has  not  yet 
happened. 

The  historical  role  of  Communism  in  the  undeveloped  coun¬ 
tries  has  determined  the  course  and  the  character  of  the  revolu¬ 
tion  which  it  has  had  to  bring  about. 


Character  of  the  Revolution 


1. 


History  shows  that  in  countries  where  Communist  revolu¬ 
tions  have  taken  place  other  parties  too  have  been  dissatisfied 
with  existing^conditions.  The  best  example  is  Russia,  where  the 
party  which  accomplished  the  Communist  revolution  was  not 
the  only  revolutionary  party. 

However,  only  the  Communist  parties  were  both  revolu¬ 
tionary  in  their  opposition  to  the  status  quo  and  staunch  and 
consistent  in  their  support  of  the  industrial  transformation.  In 
practice,  this  meant  a  radical  destruction  of  established  owner¬ 
ship  relations.  No  other  party  wept  so  far  in  this  respect.  None 
was  "industrial"  to  that  degree. 

It  is  less  clear  why  these  parties  had  to  be  socialist  in  their 
program.  Under  the  backward  conditions  existing  in  Czarist 
Russia,  capitalist  private  ownership  not  only  showed  itself  in¬ 
capable  of  rapid  industrial  transformation,  but  actually  ob¬ 
structed  it.  The  private  property  class  had  developed  in  a 
country  in  which  extremely  powerful  feudal  relationships  still 
existed,  while  monopolies  of  more  developed  countries  retained 
their  grip  on  this  enormous  area  abounding  in  raw  materials 
and  markets. 

Czarist  Russia,  according  to  its  history,  had  to  be  a  latecomer 
15 


16  THE  NEW  CLAS^ 

with  respect  to  the  industrial  revolution.  It  is  the  only  Euro¬ 
pean  country  which  did  not  pass  through  the  Reformation  and 
the  Renaissance.  It  did  not  have  anything  like  the  medieval 
European  city-states.  Backward,  semi-feudal,  with  absolutist 
monarchy  and  a  bureaucratic  centralism,  with  a  rapid  increase 
of  the  proletariat  in  several  centers,  Russia  found  herself  in 
the  whirlpool  of  modem  world  capitalism,  and  in  the  snares 
of  the  financial  interests  of  the  gigantic  banking  centers. 

Lenin  states  in  his  work  Imperialism,  the  Final  Stage  of 
Capitalism  that  three-fourths  of  the  capital  of  the  large  banks  in 
Russia  was  in  the  hands  of  foreign  capitalists.  Trotsky  in  his 
history  of  the  Russian  revolution  emphasizes  that  foreigners 
controlled  forty  per  cent  of  the  shares  of  industrial  capital  in 
Russia,  and  that  this  percentage  was  even  greater  in  some  lead¬ 
ing  industries.  As  for  Yugoslavia,  foreigners  had  a  decisive 
influence  in  the  most  important  branches  of  Yugoslav  economy. 
These  facts  alone  do  not  prove  anything.  But  they  show  that 
foreign  capitalists  used  their  power  to  check  progress  in  these 
countries,  to  develop  them  exclusively  as  their  own  sources  of 
raw  materials  and  cheap  labor,  with  the  result  that  these  na¬ 
tions  became  unprogressive  and  even  began  to  decline. 

The  party  which  had  the  historic  task  of  carrying  out  the 
revolution  in  these  countries  had  to  be  anti-capitalistic  in  its 
internal  policy  and  anti-imperialistic  in  its  foreign  policy. 

Internally,  domestic  capital  was  weak,  and  was  largely  an 
instrument  or  affiliate  of  foreign  capital.  It  was  not  the  cap¬ 
italist  class  but  another  class,  the  proletariat  which  was  arising 
from  the  increasing  poverty  of  the  peasantry,  that  was  vitally 
interested  in  the  industrial  revolution.  Just  as  the  elimination 
of  outrageous  exploitation  was  a  matter  of  life  and  death  for 
those  who  already  were  proletarians,  so  was  industrialization  a 
matter  of  survival  for  those  who  in  their  turn  were  about  to 
become  proletarians.  The  movement  which  represented  both 
of  these  had  to  be  anti-capitalistic,  that  is,  socialistic  in  its 
ideas,  slogans  and  pledges. 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  REVOLUTION  17 

The  revolutionary  party  could  not  seriously  contemplate  exe¬ 
cution  of  an  industrial  revolution  unless  it  concentrated  all  do¬ 
mestic  resources  in  its  own  hands,  particularly  those  of  native 
capitalists  against  whom  the  masses  were  also  embittered  because 
of  severe  exploitation  and  the  use  of  inhumane  methods.  The 
revolutionary  party  had  to  take  a  similar  stand  against  foreign 
capital. 

Other  parties  were  unable  to  follow  a  similar  program.  All 
of  them  either  aspired  to  a  return  to  the  old  system,  to  preserva¬ 
tion  of  vested,  static  relationships;  or  at  best,  to  gradual  and 
peaceful  development.  Even  the  parties  which  were  anti-capital¬ 
istic,  as  for  example  the  SRs  (Socialist-Revolutionary  Party)  in 
Russia,  aspired  toward  returning  society  to  idyllic  primitive 
peasant  life.  Even  the  socialist  parties  such  as  the  Mensheviks 
in  Russia  did  not  go  farther  than  to  push  for  the  violent  over¬ 
throw  of  the  barriers  to  free  capitalist  development.  They  took 
the  point  of  view  that  it  was  necessary  to  have  fully  developed 
capitalism  in  order  to  arrive  at  socialism  later.  However,  the 
problem  here  was  different;  both  a  return  to  the  old  system  and 
unhampered  development  of  capitalism  were  impossible  for 
these  countries.  Neither  solution  was  capable,  under  the  given 
international  and  internal  conditions,  of  resolving  the  urgent 
problem  of  further  development  of  these  countries,  i.e.,  their 
industrial  revolutions. 

Only  the  party  which  was  in  favor  of  the  anti-capitalist 
revolution  and  rapid  industrialization  had  prospects  for  suc¬ 
cess.  Obviously  that  party  had  to  be,  in  addition,  socialist  in 
its  convictions.  But  since  it  was  obliged  to  operate  under  pre¬ 
vailing  conditions  in  general,  and  in  the  labor  or  socialist 
movements,  such  a  party  had  to  depend  ideologically  on  the 
concept  of  the  inevitability  and  usefulness  of  modern  industry 
as  well  as  on  the  tenet  that  revolution  was  unavoidable.  This 
concept  already  existed,  it  was  necessary  only  to  modify  it.  The 
concept  was  Marxism— its  revolutionary  aspect.  Association  with 
revolutionary  Marxism,  or  with  the  European  socialist  move- 


18 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


ment,  was  natural  for  the  party  then.  Later,  with  the  develop 
ment  of  the  revolution  and  with  the  organizational  changes  in 
the  developed  countries,  it  became  just  as  essential  for  it  to 
separate  itself  from  the  reformism  of  European  socialism. 

The  inevitability  of  revolution  and  of  rapid  industrialization, 
which  exacted  enormous  sacrifices  and  involved  ruthless  vio¬ 
lence,  required  not  only  promises  but  faith  in  the  possibility  of 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  on  earth.  Advancing,  as  others  also  do, 
along  the  line  of  least  resistance,  the  supporters  of  revolution 
and  industrialization  often  departed  from  established  Marxist 
and  socialist  doctrine.  However,  it  was  impossible  for  them  to 
shed  the  doctrine  entirely. 

Capitalism  and  capitalist  relationships  were  the  proper  and 
at  the  given  moment  the  inevitable  forms  and  techniques  by 
which  society  expressed  its  needs  and  aspirations  for  improving 
and  expanding  production.  In  Great  Britain,  in  the  first  half 
of  the  nineteenth  century,  capitalism  improved  and  expanded 
production.  And  just  as  the  industrialists  in  Britain  had  to  de¬ 
stroy  the  peasantry  in  order  to  attain  a  higher  degree  of  produc¬ 
tion,  the  industrialists,  or  the  bourgeoisie,  in  Russia  had  to 
become  a  victim  of  the  industrial  revolution.  The  participants 
and  the  forms  were  different,  but  the  law  was  the  same  in  both 
cases. 

In  both  instances  socialism  was  inevitable— as  a  slogan  and 
pledge,  as  a  faith  and  a  lofty  ideal,  and,  in  fact,  as  a  particular 
form  of  government  and  ownership  which  would  facilitate  the 
industrial  revolution  and  make  possible  improvement  and  ex¬ 
pansion  of  production. 


2. 


All  the  revolutions  of  the  past  originated  after  new  economic 
or  social  relationships  had  begun  to  prevail,  and  the  old  politi- 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  REVOLUTION  19 

cal  system  had  become  the  sole  obstacle  to  further  development. 

None  of  these  revolutions  sought  anything  other  than  the 
destruction  of  the  old  political  forms  and  an  opening  of  the 
way  for  already  mature  social  forces  and  relationships  existing 
in  the  old  society.  Even  in  those  cases  where  the  revolutionists 
desired  something  else,  such  as  the  building  of  economic  and 
social  relationships  by  means  of  force,  as  did  the  Jacobins  in 
the  French  revolution,  they  had  to  accept  failure  and  be  swiftly 
eliminated. 

In  all  previous  revolutions,  force  and  violence  appeared 
predominantly  as  a  consequence,  as  an  instrument  of  new  but 
already  prevailing  economic  and  social  forces  and  relationships. 
Even  when  force  and  violence  surpassed  proper  limits  during 
the  course  of  a  revolution,  in  the  final  analysis  the  revolutionary 
forces  had  to  be  directed  toward  a  positive  and  attainable  goal. 
In  these  cases  terror  and  despotism  might  have  been  inevitable 
but  solely  temporary  manifestations. 

All  so-called  bourgeois  revolutions,  whether  achieved  from 
below,  i.e.,  with  participation  of  the  masses  as  in  France,  or 
from  above,  i.e.,  by  coup  d’etat  as  in  Germany  under  Bismarck, 
had  to  end  up  in  political  democracy.  That  is  understandable. 
Their  task  was  chiefly  to  destroy  the  old  despotic  political 
system,  and  to  permit  the  establishment  of  political  relation¬ 
ships  which  would  be  adequate  for  already  existing  economic 
and  other  needs,  particularly  those  concerning  the  free  produc¬ 
tion  of  goods. 

The  case  is  entirely  different  with  contemporary  Communist 
revolutions.  These  revolutions  did  not  occur  because  new,  let 
us  say  socialist,  relationships  were  already  existing  in  the  econ¬ 
omy,  or  because  capitalism  was  “overdeveloped.”  On  the  con¬ 
trary.  They  did  occur  because  capitalism  was  not  fully  de¬ 
veloped  and  because  it  was  not  able  to  carry  out  the  industrial 
transformation  of  the  country. 

In  France  capitalism  had  already  prevailed  in  the  economy. 


20  THE  NEW  CLAS9 

in  social  relationships,  and  even  in  the  public  conscience  prior 
to  inception  of  the  revolution.  The  case  is  hardly  comparable 
with  socialism  in  Russia,  China,  or  Yugoslavia. 

The  leaders  of  the  Russian  revolution  themselves  were  aware 
of  this  fact.  Speaking  at  the  Seventh  Congress  of  the  Russian 
Communist  Party  on  March  7,  1918,  while  the  revolution  was 
still  in  progress,  Lenin  said: 


.  .  .  One  of  the  fundamental  differences  between  bourgeois 
and  socialist  revolutions  is  that  in  a  bourgeois  revolution, 
which  arises  from  feudalism,  new  economic  organizations 
which  gradually  change  all  aspects  of  feudal  society  are  pro¬ 
gressively  created  in  the  midst  of  the  old  order.  In  accom¬ 
plishing  this  task,  every  bourgeois  revolution  accomplishes 
all  that  is  required  of  it:  it  hastens  the  growth  of  capitalism. 

A  socialist  revolution  is  in  an  entirely  different  situation. 
To  the  extent  that  a  country  which  had  to  begin  a  socialist 
revolution,  because  of  the  vagaries  of  history,  is  backward, 
the  transition  from  old  capitalist  relations  to  socialist  rela¬ 
tions  is  increasingly  difficult.  .  .  . 

The  difference  between  socialist  revolutions  and  bourgeois 
revolutions  lies  specifically  in  the  fact  that,  in  the  latter  case, 
established  forms  of  capitalist  relations  exist,  while  the  soviet 
power— the  proletariat— does  not  attain  such  relations,  if  we 
exclude  the  most  developed  forms  of  capitalism,  which  actually 
encompassed  a  small  number  of  top  industries  and  only  very 
scantily  touched  agriculture. 

I  quote  Lenin,  but  I  could  quote  any  leader  of  the  Com¬ 
munist  revolution  and  numerous  other  authors,  as  confirmation 
of  the  fact  that  settled  relationships  did  not  exist  for  the 
new  society,  but  that  someone,  in  this  case  the  “soviet  power,” 
must  therefore  build  them.  If  the  new  “socialist”  relationships 
had  been  developed  to  the  fullest  in  the  country  in  which  Com¬ 
munist  revolution  was  able  to  emerge  victorious,  there  would 
have  been  no  need  for  so  many  assurances,  dissertations,  and 
efforts  embracing  the  “building  of  socialism.” 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  REVOLUTION  21 

This  leads  to  an  apparent  contradiction.  If  the  conditions 
for  a  new  society  were  not  sufficiently  prevalent,  then  who 
needed  the  revolution?  Moreover,  how  was  the  revolution  pos¬ 
sible?  How  could  it  survive  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  new 
social  relationships  were  not  yet  in  the  formative  process  in 
the  old  society? 

No  revolution  or  party  had  ever  before  set  itself  to  the  task 
of  building  social  relationships  or  a  new  society.  But  this  was 
the  primary  objective  of  the  Communist  revolution. 

Communist  leaders,  though  no  better  acquainted  than  others 
with  the  laws  which  govern  society,  discovered  that  in  the  coun¬ 
try  in  which  their  revolution  was  possible,  industrialization  was 
also  possible,  particularly  when  it  involved  a  transformation  of 
society  in  keeping  with  their  ideological  hypothesis.  Experience 
—the  success  of  revolution  under  “unfavorable”  conditions— 
confirmed  this  for  them;  the  “building  of  socialism”  did  like¬ 
wise.  This  strengthened  their  illusion  that  they  knew  the  laws 
of  social  development.  In  fact,  they  were  in  the  position  of 
making  a  blueprint  for  a  new  society,  and  then  of  starting  to 
build  it,  making  corrections  here  and  leaving  out  something 
there,  all  the  while  adhering  closely  to  their  plans. 

Industrialization,  as  an  inevitable,  legitimate  necessity  of 
society,  and  the  Communist  way  of  accomplishing  it,  joined 
forces  in  the  countries  of  Communist  revolutions. 

However,  neither  of  these,  though  they  progressed  together 
and  on  parallel  tracks,  could  achieve  success  overnight.  After 
the  completion  of  the  revolution,  someone  had  to  shoulder  the 
responsibility  for  industrialization.  In  the  West,  this  role  was 
taken  over  by  the  economic  forces  of  capitalism  liberated  from 
the  despotic  political  chains,  while  in  the  countries  of  Com¬ 
munist  revolutions  no  similar  forces  existed  and,  thus,  their 
function  had  to  be  taken  over  by  the  revolutionary  organs 
themselves,  the  new  authority,  that  is,  the  revolutionary  party. 

In  earlier  revolutions,  revolutionary  force  and  violence  be¬ 
came  a  hindrance  to  the  economy  as  soon  as  the  old  order  was 


22 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


overthrown.  In  Communist  revolutions,  force  and  violence  are 
a  condition  for  further  development  and  even  progress.  In  the 
words  of  earlier  revolutionaries,  force  and  violence  were  only 
a  necessary  evil  and  a  means  to  an  end.  In  the  words  of  Com¬ 
munists,  force  and  violence  are  elevated  to  the  lofty  position 
of  a  cult  and  an  ultimate  goal.  In  the  past,  the  classes  and  forces 
which  made  up  a  new  society  already  existed  before  the  revolu¬ 
tion  erupted.  The  Communist  revolutions  are  the  first  which 
have  had  to  create  a  new  society  and  new  social  forces. 

Even  as  the  revolutions  in  the  West  had  inevitably  to  end  in 
democracy  after  all  the  "aberrations”  and  "withdrawals,”  in 
the  East,  the  revolutions  had  to  end  in  despotism.  The  methods 
of  terror  and  violence  in  the  West  became  needless  and  ridicu¬ 
lous,  and  even  a  hindrance  in  accomplishing  the  revolution  for 
the  revolutionaries  and  revolutionary  parties.  In  the  East,  the 
case  was  the  opposite.  Not  only  did  despotism  continue  in  the 
East  because  the  transformation  of  industry  required  so  much 
time,  but,  as  we  shall  see  later,  it  lasted  long  after  industrializa¬ 
tion  had  taken  place. 


3. 

There  are  other  basic  differences  between  Communist  re¬ 
volutions  and  earlier  ones.  Earlier  revolutions,  though  they 
had  reached  the  point  of  readiness  in  an  economy  and  a  society, 
were  unable  to  break  out  without  advantageous  conditions. 
We  now  know  the  general  conditions  necessary  for  the  eruption 
and  success  of  a  revolution.  However,  every  revolution  has,  in 
addition  to  these  general  conditions,  its  peculiarites  which 
make  its  planning  and  execution  possible. 

War,  or  more  precisely,  national  collapse  of  the  state  organi¬ 
zation,  was  unnecessary  for  past  revolutions,  at  least  for  the 
larger  ones.  Until  now,  however,  this  has  been  a  basic  condition 
for  the  victory  of  Communist  revolutions.  This  is  even  valid 


23 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  REVOLUTION 
for  China;  true,  there  the  revolution  began  prior  to  the  Japa¬ 
nese  invasion,  but  it  continued  for  an  entire  decade  to  spread 
and  finally  to  emerge  victorious  with  the  end  of  the  war.  The 
Spanish  revolution  of  1936,  which  could  have  been  an  excep¬ 
tion,  did  not  have  time  to  transform  itself  into  a  purely  Com¬ 
munist  revolution,  and,  therefore,  never  emerged  victorious. 

The  reason  war  was  necessary  for  the  Communist  revolution, 
or  the  downfall  of  the  state  machinery,  must  be  sought  in  the 
immaturity  of  the  economy  and  society.  In  a  serious  collapse 
of  a  system,  and  particularly  in  a  war  which  has  been  unsuccess¬ 
ful  for  the  existing  ruling  circles  and  state  system,  a  small  but 
well-organized  and  disciplined  group  is  inevitably  able  to  take 
authority  in  its  hands. 

Thus  at  the  time  of  the  October  Revolution  the  Communist 
Party  had  about  80,000  members.  The  Yugoslav  Communist 
Party  began  the  1941  revolution  with  about  10,000  members. 
To  grasp  power,  the  support  and  active  participation  of  at  least 
a  part  of  the  people  is  necessary,  but  in  every  case  the  party 
which  leads  the  revolution  and  assumes  power  is  a  minority 
group  relying  exclusively  on  exceptionally  favorable  condi¬ 
tions.  Furthermore,  such  a  party  cannot  be  a  majority  group 
until  it  becomes  the  permanently  established  authority. 

The  accomplishment  of  such  a  grandiose  task— the  destruc¬ 
tion  of  a  social  order  and  the  building  of  a  new  society  when 
conditions  for  such  an  undertaking  are  not  propitious  in  the 
economy  or  society— is  a  task  able  to  attract  only  a  minority, 
and  at  that,  only  those  who  believe  fanatically  in  its  possibilities. 

Special  conditions  and  a  particular  party  are  basic  charac¬ 
teristics  of  Communist  revolutions. 

The  achievement  of  every  revolution,  as  well  as  of  every 
victory  in  war,  demands  centralization  of  all  forces.  According 
to  the  Malthusian  theory,  the  French  revolution  was  the  first 
in  which  “all  the  resources  of  a  people  at  war  were  placed  in 
the  hands  of  the  authorities;  people,  food,  clothing.”  This  must 
be  the  case  to  an  even  greater  degree  in  a  Communist  “im- 


24 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


mature”  revolution:  not  only  all  material  means  but  all  in¬ 
tellectual  means  must  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  party,  and  the 
party  itself  must  become  politically,  and  as  an  organization, 
centralized  to  the  fullest  extent.  Only  Communist  parties, 
politically  united,  firmly  grouped  around  the  center,  and  pos¬ 
sessing  identical  ideological  viewpoints,  are  able  to  carry  out 
such  a  revolution. 

Centralization  of  all  forces  and  means  as  well  as  some  kind 
of  political  unity  of  the  revolutionary  parties  are  essential  con¬ 
ditions  for  every  successful  revolution.  For  the  Communist 
revolution  these  conditions  are  even  more  important,  since 
from  the  very  beginning  the  Communists  exclude  every  other 
independent  political  group  or  party  from  being  an  ally  of 
their  party.  At  the  same  time  they  demand  uniformity  of  all 
viewpoints,  including  practical  political  views  as  well  as  theo¬ 
retical,  philosophical,  and  even  moral  views.  The  fact  that  the 
left-of-center  SR’s  (Socialist-Revolutionaries)  participated  in 
the  October  Revolution,  and  that  individuals  and  groups  from 
other  parties  participated  in  the  revolutions  in  China  and  Yugo¬ 
slavia,  does  not  disprove  but  rather  confirms  this  proposition: 
these  groups  were  only  collaborators  of  the  Communist  Party, 
and  only  to  a  fixed  degree  in  the  struggle.  After  the  revolution 
these  collaborating  parties  were  dispersed,  or  they  dissolved  of 
their  own  accord  and  merged  with  the  Communist  Party.  The 
Bolsheviks  routed  the  left-of-center  SR’s  as  soon  as  the  latter 
wished  to  become  independent,  while  the  non-Communist 
groups  in  Yugoslavia  and  China  that  had  supported  the  revolu¬ 
tion  had,  in  the  meantime,  renounced  every  one  of  their  polit¬ 
ical  activities. 

The  earlier  revolutions  were  not  carried  out  by  a  single  polit¬ 
ical  group.  To  be  sure,  in  the  course  of  a  revolution  individual 
groups  pressured  and  destroyed  one  another;  but,  taken  as  a 
whole,  the  revolution  was  not  the  work  of  only  one  group.  In 
the  French  revolution  the  Jacobins  succeeded  in  maintaining 
their  dictatorship  for  a  brief  period  only.  Napoleon’s  dictator- 


25 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  REVOLUTION 

ship,  which  emerged  from  the  revolution,  signified  both  the 
end  of  the  Jacobin  revolution  and  the  beginning  of  the  rule  of 
the  bourgeoisie.  In  every  case,  although  one  party  played  a  de¬ 
cisive  role  in  the  earlier  revolutions,  the  other  parties  did  not 
surrender  their  independence.  Although  suppression  and  dis- 
ptersion  existed,  they  could  be  enforced  only  for  a  brief  time. 
The  parties  could  not  be  destroyed  and  would  always  emerge 
anew.  Even  the  Paris  Commune,  which  the  Communists  take 
as  the  forerunner  of  their  revolution  and  their  state,  was  a 
multi-party  revolution. 

A  party  may  have  played  the  chief,  and  even  an  exclusive,  role 
in  a  particular  phase  of  a  revolution.  But  no  previous  party  was 
ideologically,  or  as  an  organization,  centralized  to  the  degree 
that  the  Communist  Party  was.  Neither  the  Puritans  in  the 
English  revolution  nor  the  Jacobins  in  the  French  revolution 
were  bound  by  the  same  philosophical  and  ideological  views, 
although  the  first  belonged  to  a  religious  sect.  From  the  organi¬ 
zational  point  of  view  the  Jacobins  were  a  federation  of  clubs; 
the  Puritans  were  not  even  that.  Only  contemporary  Com¬ 
munist  revolutions  pushed  compulsory  parties  to  the  forefront, 
which  were  ideologically  and  organizationally  monolithic. 

In  every  case  one  thing  is  certain;  in  all  earlier  revolutions 
the  necessity  for  revolutionary  methods  and  parties  disappeared 
with  the  end  of  civil  war  and  of  foreign  intervention,  and  these 
methods  and  parties  had  to  be  done  away  with.  After  Com¬ 
munist  revolutions,  the  Communists  continue  with  both  the 
methods  and  the  forms  of  the  revolution,  and  their  party  soon 
attains  the  fullest  degree  of  centralism  and  ideological  ex¬ 
clusiveness. 

Lenin  expressly  emphasized  this  during  the  revolution  itself 
in  enumerating  his  conditions  for  acceptance  in  the  Comin¬ 
tern:* 

In  the  present  epoch  of  acute  civil  war,  a  Communist  Party 
will  be  able  to  perform  its  duty  only  if  it  is  organized  in  the 


Selected  Works,  Vol.  X;  New  York,  iDternational  Publishers,  1936. 


26  THE  NEW  CL4SS 

most  centralized  manner,  only  if  iron  discipline  bordering  on 
military  discipline  prevails  in  it,  and  if  its  party  center  is  a 
powerful  and  authoritative  organ,  wielding  wide  powers  and 
enjoying  the  universal  confidence  of  the  members  of  the  party. 

And  to  this,  Stalin  appended,  in  Foundations  of  Leninism:* 

This  is  the  position  in  regard  to  discipline  in  the  party  in 
the  period  of  struggle  preceding  the  achievement  of  the 
dictatorship. 

The  same,  but  to  an  even  greater  degree,  must  be  said 
about  discipline  in  the  party  after  the  dictatorship  has  been 
achieved. 

The  revolutionary  atmosphere  and  vigilance,  insistence  on 
ideological  unity,  political  and  ideological  exclusiveness,  polit¬ 
ical  and  other  centralism  do  not  cease  after  assuming  control. 
On  the  contrary,  they  become  even  more  intensified. 

Ruthlessness  in  methods,  exclusiveness  in  ideas,  and  monopoly 
in  authority  in  the  earlier  revolutions  lasted  more  or  less  as 
long  as  the  revolutions  themselves.  Since  revolution  in  the 
Communist  revolution  was  only  the  first  act  of  the  despotic 
and  totalitarian  authority  of  a  group,  it  is  difficult  to  forecast 
the  duration  of  that  authority. 

In  earlier  revolutions,  including  the  Reign  of  Terror  in 
France,  superficial  attention  was  paid  to  the  elimination  of  real 
oppositionists.  No  attention  was  paid  to  the  elimination  of  those 
who  might  become  oppositionists.  The  eradication  and  perse¬ 
cution  of  some  social  or  ideological  groups  in  the  religious  wars 
of  the  Middle  Ages  was  the  only  exception  to  this.  From  theory 
and  practice.  Communists  know  that  they  are  in  conflict  with 
all  other  classes  and  ideologies,  and  behave  accordingly.  They 
are  fighting  against  not  only  actual  but  also  potential  opposi¬ 
tion.  In  the  Baltic  countries,  thousands  of  people  were  liqui¬ 
dated  overnight  on  the  basis  of  documents  indicating  previously 
held  ideological  and  political  views.  The  massacre  of  several 

•  New  York,  Intemauonal  Publishers.  1939. 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  REVOLUTION  27 

thousand  Polish  officers  in  the  Katyii  Forest  was  of  similar 
character.  In  the  case  of  Communism,  long  after  the  revolution 
is  over,  terrorist  and  oppressive  methods  continue  to  be  used. 
Sometimes  these  are  perfected  and  become  more  extensive  than 
in  the  revolution,  as  in  the  case  of  the  liquidation  of  the  Kulaks. 
Ideological  exclusiveness  and  intolerance  are  intensified  after 
the  revolution.  Even  when  it  is  able  to  reduce  physical  oppres¬ 
sion,  the  tendency  of  the  ruling  party  is  to  strengthen  the 
prescribed  ideology— Marxism-Leninism. 

Earlier  revolutions,  particularly  the  so-called  bourgeois  ones, 
attached  considerable  significance  to  the  establishment  of  indi^ 
vidual  freedoms  immediately  following  cessation  of  the  revolu¬ 
tionary  terror.  Even  the  revolutionaries  considered  it  important 
to  assure  the  legal  status  of  the  citizenry.  Independent 
administration  of  justice  was  an  inevitable  final  result  of  all 
these  revolutions.  The  Communist  regime  in  the  U.S.S.R.  is 
still  remote  from  independent  administration  of  justice  after 
forty  years  of  tenure.  The  final  results  of  earlier  revolutions 
were  often  greater  legal  security  and  greater  civil  rights.  This 
cannot  be  said  of  the  Communist  revolution. 

There  is  another  vast  difference  between  the  earlier  revolu¬ 
tions  and  contemporary  Communist  ones.  Earlier  revolutions, 
especially  the  greater  ones,  were  a  product  of  the  struggles  of 
the  working  classes,  but  their  ultimate  results  fell  to  another 
class  under  whose  intellectual  and  often  organizational  leader¬ 
ship  the  revolutions  were  accomplished.  The  bourgeoisie,  in 
whose  name  the  revolution  was  carried  out,  to  a  considerable 
extent  harvested  the  fruits  of  the  struggles  of  the  peasants  and 
sans-culottes.  The  masses  of  a  nation  also  participated  in  a 
Communist  revolution;  however,  the  fruits  of  revolution  do 
not  fall  to  them,  but  to  the  bureaucracy.  For  the  bureaucracy 
is  nothing  else  but  the  party  which  carried  out  the  revolution. 
In  Communist  revolutions,  the  revolutionary  movements  which 
carried  out  the  revolutions  are  not  liquidated.  Communist  re¬ 
volutions  may  "eat  their  own  children,”  but  not  all  of  them. 


28 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


In  fact,  on  completion  of  a  Communist  revolution,  ruthless 
and  underhanded  deals  inevitably  are  made  between  various 
groups  and  factions  which  disagree  about  the  path  of  the  future. 

Mutual  accusations  always  revolve  around  dogmatic  proof  as 
to  who  is  “objectively”  or  “subjectively”  a  greater  counter¬ 
revolutionary  or  agent  of  internal  and  foreign  “capitalism.” 
Regardless  of  the  manner  in  which  these  disagreements  are 
resoh'ed,  the  group  that  emerges  victorious  is  the  one  that  is 
the  most  consistent  and  determined  supporter  of  industriali¬ 
zation  along  Communist  principles,  i.e.,  on  the  basis  of  total 
party  monopoly,  particularly  of  state  organs  in  control  of  pro¬ 
duction.  The  Communist  revolution  does  not  devour  those 
of  its  children  who  are  needed  for  its  future  course— for  indus¬ 
trialization.  Revolutionaries  who  accepted  the  ideas  and  slogans 
of  the  revolution  literally,  naively  believing  in  their  material¬ 
ization,  are  usually  liquidated.  The  group  which  understood 
that  revolution  would  secure  authority,  on  a  social-political- 
Communist  basis,  as  an  instrument  of  future  industrial  trans¬ 
formation,  emerges  victorious. 

The  Communist  revolution  is  the  first  in  which  the  revolu¬ 
tionaries  and  their  allies,  particularly  the  authority-wielding 
group,  survived  the  revolution.  Similar  groups  inevitably  failed 
in  earlier  ones.  The  Communist  revolution  is  the  first  to  be 
carried  out  to  the  advantage  of  the  revolutionaries.  They,  and 
the  bureaucracy  which  forms  around  them,  harvest  its  fruits. 
This  creates  in  them,  and  in  the  broader  echelons  of  the  party, 
the  illusion  that  theirs  is  the  first  revolution  that  remained  true 
to  the  slogans  on  its  banners. 


4. 


The  illusions  which  the  Communist  revolution  creates  about 
its  real  aims  are  more  permanent  and  extensive  than  those  of 
earlier  revolutions  because  the  Communist  revolution  resolves 


CHARACTER  OE  THE  REVOLUTION  29 

relationships  in  a  new  way  and  brings  about  a  new  form  of 
ownership.  Earlier  revolutions,  too,  inevitably  resulted  in  major 
or  minor  changes  in  property  relationships.  But  in  those  revolu¬ 
tions  one  form  of  private  ownership  superseded  the  others.  In 
the  Communist  revolution  this  is  not  the  case;  the  change  is 
radical  and  deep-rooted,  and  a  collective  ownership  suppresses 
private  ownership. 

The  Communist  revolution,  while  still  in  process  of  develop¬ 
ment,  destroys  capitalist,  land-holding,  private  ownership,  i.e., 
that  ownership  which  makes  use  of  foreign  labor  forces.  This 
immediately  creates  the  belief  that  the  revolutionary  promise 
of  a  new  realm  of  equality  and  justice  is  being  fulfilled.  The 
party,  or  the  state  authority  under  its  control,  simultaneously 
undertakes  extensive  measures  for  industrialization.  This  also 
intensifies  the  belief  that  the  time  of  freedom  from  want  has 
finally  arrived.  Despotism  and  oppression  are  there,  but  they 
are  accepted  as  temporary  manifestations,  to  last  only  until  the 
opposition  of  the  expropriated  authorities  and  counter-revolu¬ 
tionaries  is  stifled,  and  the  industrial  transformation  is  com¬ 
pleted. 

Several  essential  changes  occur  in  the  very  process  of 
industrialization.  Industrialization  in  a  backward  country,  es¬ 
pecially  if  it  has  no  assistance  and  is  hindered  from  abroad, 
demands  concentration  of  all  material  resources.  Nationaliza¬ 
tion  of  industrial  property  and  the  land  is  the  first  concentration 
of  property  in  the  hands  of  the  new  regime.  However,  it  does 
not,  and  can  not,  stop  at  this. 

The  newly  originated  ownership  inevitably  comes  in  conflict 
with  other  forms  of  ownership.  The  new  ownership  imposes 
itself  by  force  on  smaller  owners  who  do  not  employ  someone 
else’s  manpower,  or  to  whom  such  manpower  is  unessential,  i.e., 
on  craftsmen,  workers,  small  commercial  merchants,  and  peas¬ 
ants.  This  expropriation  of  small  property  owners  is  effected 
even  when  it  is  not  done  for  economic  motives,  i.e.,  in  order 
to  attain  a  higher  degree  of  productivity. 


30  THE  NEW  CLASS 

In  the  course  of  industrialization,  the  property  of  those  ele¬ 
ments  who  were  not  opposed  to,  or  even  assisted,  the  revolution 
is  taken  over.  As  a  matter  of  form,  the  state  also  becomes  the 
owner  of  this  property.  The  state  administers  and  manages  the 
property.  Private  ownership  ceases,  or  decreases  to  a  role  of 
secondary  importance,  but  its  complete  disappearance  is  subject 
to  the  whim  of  the  new  men  in  authority. 

This  is  experienced  by  the  Communists  and  by  some  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  masses  as  a  complete  liquidation  of  classes  and  the 
realization  of  a  classless  society.  In  fact,  the  old  pre-revolution¬ 
ary  classes  do  disappear  with  the  completion  of  industrialization 
and  collectivization.  There  remains  the  spontaneous  and  unor¬ 
ganized  displeasure  of  the  mass  of  the  people— a  displeasure 
which  neither  ceases  nor  abates.  Communist  delusions  and  self- 
deceit  about  the  “remnants”  and  “influence”  of  the  “class 
enemy”  still  persist.  But  the  illusion  that  the  long-dreamed  class¬ 
less  society  arises  by  these  means  is  complete,  at  least  for  the 
Communists  themselves. 

Every  revolution,  and  even  every  war,  creates  illusions  and 
is  conducted  in  the  name  of  unrealizable  ideals.  During  the 
struggle  the  ideals  seem  real  enough  for  the  combatants;  by  the 
end  they  often  cease  to  exist.  Not  so  in  the  case  of  a  Communist 
revolution.  Those  who  carry  out  the  Communist  revolution  as 
well  as  those  among  the  lower  echelons  persist  in  their  illusions 
long  after  the  armed  struggle.  Despite  oppression,  despotism, 
unconcealed  confiscations,  and  privileges  of  the  ruling  echelons, 
some  of  the  people— and  especially  the  Communists— retain  the 
illusions  contained  in  their  slogans. 

Although  the  Communist  revolution  may  start  with  the  most 
idealistic  concepts,  calling  for  wonderful  heroism  and  gigantic 
effort,  it  sows  the  greatest  and  the  most  permanent  illusions. 

Revolutions  are  inevitable  in  the  lifetime  of  nations.  They 
may  result  in  despotism,  but  they  also  launch  nations  on  paths 
previously  blocked  to  them. 

The  Communist  revolution  cannot  attain  a  single  one  of  the 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  REVOLUTION  SI 

ideals  named  as  its  motivating  force.  However,  Communist  re¬ 
volution  has  brought  about  a  measure  of  industrial  civilization 
to  vast  areas  of  Europe  and  Asia.  In  this  way,  material  bases 
have  actually  been  created  for  a  future  freer  society.  Thus  while 
bringing  about  the  most  complete  despotism,  the  Communist 
revolution  has  also  created  the  basis  for  the  abolition  of  des¬ 
potism.  As  the  nineteenth  century  introduced  modern  industry 
to  the  West,  the  twentieth  century  will  introduce  modem  in¬ 
dustry  to  the  East.  The  shadow  of  Lenin  extends  over  the  vast 
expanse  of  Eurasia  in  one  way  or  another.  In  despotic  form  in 
China,  in  democratic  form  in  India  and  Burma,  all  of  the 
remaining  Asiatic  and  other  nations  are  inevitably  entering  an 
industrial  revolution.  The  Russian  revolution  initiated  this 
process.  The  process  remains  the  incalculable  and  historically 
significant  fact  of  the  revolution. 


5. 


It  might  appear  that  Communist  revolutions  are  mostly  his¬ 
torical  deceptions  and  chance  occurrences.  In  a  sense  this  is 
true:  no  other  revolutions  have  required  so  many  exceptional 
conditions;  no  other  revolutions  promised  so  much  and  accom¬ 
plished  so  little.  Demagoguery  and  misrepresentation  are  inevi¬ 
table  among  the  Communist  leaders  since  they  are  forced  to 
promise  the  most  ideal  society  and  “abolition  of  every  exploi¬ 
tation.” 

However,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  Communists  deceived 
the  people,  that  is,  that  they  purposely  and  consciously  did 
something  different  from  what  they  had  promised.  The  fact 
is  simply  this:  they  were  unable  to  accomplish  that  in  which 
they  so  fanatically  believed.  They  cannot  acknowledge  this 
even  when  forced  to  execute  a  policy  contrary  to  everything 
promised  before  and  during  the  revolution.  From  their  point 
of  view,  such  acknowledgment  would  be  an  admission  that  the 


32  the  new  class 

revolution  was  unnecessary.  It  would  also  be  an  admission  that 
they  had  themselves  become  superfluous.  Anything  of  the  sort 
is  impossible  for  them. 

The  ultimate  results  of  a  social  struggle  can  never  be  of  the 
kind  envisaged  by  those  who  carry  it  out.  Some  such  struggles 
depend  on  an  infinite  and  complex  series  of  circumstances  be¬ 
yond  the  controllable  range  of  human  intellect  and  action.  This 
is  most  true  of  revolutions  that  demand  superhuman  efforts 
and  that  effect  hasty  and  radical  changes  in  society.  They  inevi¬ 
tably  generate  absolute  confidence  that  the  ultimate  in  human 
prosperity  and  liberty  will  appear  after  their  victories.  The 
French  revolution  was  carried  out  in  the  name  of  common 
sense,  in  the  belief  that  liberty,  equality,  and  fraternity  would 
eventually  appear.  The  Russian  revolution  was  carried  out  in 
the  name  of  “a  purely  scientific  view  of  the  world,”  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  creating  a  classless  society.  Neither  revolution  could 
possibly  have  been  created  if  the  revolutionaries,  along  with  a 
part  of  the  people,  had  not  believed  in  their  own  idealistic  aims. 

Communist  illusions  as  to  post-revolutionary  possibilities 
were  more  preponderant  among  the  Communists  than  among 
those  who  followed  them.  The  Communists  should  have  known 
and,  in  fact,  did  know  about  the  inevitability  of  industriali¬ 
zation,  but  they  could  only  guess  about  its  social  results  and 
relationships. 

Official  Communist  historians  in  the  U.S.S.R.  and  Yugoslavia 
describe  the  revolution  as  if  it  were  the  fruit  of  the  previously 
planned  actions  of  its  leaders.  But  only  the  course  of  the  revolu¬ 
tion  and  the  armed  struggle  was  consciously  planned,  while  the 
forms  which  the  revolution  took  stemmed  from  the  immediate 
course  of  events  and  from  the  direct  action  taken.  It  is  revealing 
tliat  Lenin,  undoubtedly  one  of  the  greatest  revolutionaries  in 
history,  did  not  foresee  when  or  in  what  form  the  revolution 
would  erupt  until  it  was  almost  upon  him.  In  January  1917, 
one  month  before  the  February  Revolution,  and  only  ten 
months  before  the  October  Revolution  which  brought  him 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  REVOLUTION 


S3 


to  power,  he  addressed  a  meeting  of  Swiss  Socialist  youths: 

"We,  the  older  generation,  perhaps  will  not  live  to  see  the 
decisive  battles  of  the  approaching  revolution.  But,  I  can,  it 
seems  to  me,  express  with  extreme  confidence  the  hope  that  the 
youth,  who  work  in  the  wonderful  socialist  movement  of 
Switzerland  and  of  the  whole  world,  will  have  the  good  fortune 
not  only  to  fight  but  also  to  emerge  victorious  in  the  approach¬ 
ing  revolution  of  the  proletariat.” 

How  can  it  then  be  said  that  Lenin,  or  anyone  else,  was  able 
to  foresee  the  social  results  arising  after  the  long  and  complex 
struggle  of  the  revolution? 

But  even  if  Communist  aims  per  se  were  unreal,  the  Com¬ 
munists,  as  distinct  from  earlier  revolutionaries,  were  fully 
realistic  in  creating  those  things  that  were  possible.  They  car¬ 
ried  it  out  in  the  only  way  possible— by  imposing  their  absolute 
totalitarian  authority.  Theirs  was  the  first  revolution  in  history 
in  which  the  revolutionaries  not  only  remain  on  the  political 
scene  after  victory  but,  in  the  most  practical  sense,  build  social 
relationships  completely  contrary  to  those  in  which  they  be¬ 
lieved  and  which  they  promised.  The  Communist  revolution, 
in  the  course  of  its  later  industrial  duration  and  transforma¬ 
tion,  converts  the  revolutionaries  themselves  into  creators  and 
masters  of  a  new  social  state. 

Marx’s  concrete  forecasts  proved  inaccurate.  To  an  even 
greater  degree,  the  same  can  be  said  for  Lenin’s  expectations 
that  a  free  or  classless  society  would  be  created  with  the  aid  of 
the  dictatorship.  But  the  need  that  made  the  revolution  inevi¬ 
table-industrial  transformation  on  the  basis  of  modern  tech¬ 
nology— is  fulfilled. 


6. 


Abstract  logic  would  indicate  that  the  Communist  revolu¬ 
tion,  when  it  achieves,  under  different  conditions  and  by  state 
compulsion,  the  same  things  achieved  by  industrial  revolutions 


34 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


and  capitalism  in  the  West,  is  nothing  but  a  form  of  state-cap¬ 
italist  revolution.  The  relationships  which  are  created  by  its 
victory  are  state<apitalist.  This  appears  to  be  even  more  true 
because  the  new  regime  also  regulates  all  political,  labor,  and 
other  relationships  and,  what  is  more  important,  distributes  the 
national  income  and  benefits  and  distributes  material  goods 
which  actually  have  been  transformed  into  state  property. 

Discussion  on  whether  or  not  the  relationships  in  the  U.S.S.R. 
and  in  other  Communist  countries  are  state-capitalist,  socialist, 
or  perhaps  something  else,  is  dogmatic  to  a  considerable  degree. 
However,  such  discussion  is  of  fundamental  importance. 

Even  if  it  is  presumed  that  state  capitalism  is  nothing  other 
than  the  “antechamber  of  socialism,”  as  Lenin  emphasized,  or 
that  it  is  the  first  phase  of  socialism,  it  is  still  not  one  iota  easier 
for  the  people  who  live  under  Communist  despotism  to  endure. 
If  the  character  of  property  and  social  relationships  brought 
about  by  the  Communist  revolution  is  strengthened  and  defined, 
the  prospects  for  liberation  of  the  people  from  such  relation¬ 
ships  become  more  realistic.  If  the  people  are  not  conscious  of 
the  nature  of  the  social  relationships  in  which  they  live,  or  if 
they  do  not  see  a  way  in  which  they  can  alter  them,  their 
struggle  cannot  have  any  prospect  of  success. 

If  the  Communist  revolution,  despite  its  promises  and  illu¬ 
sions,  is  state<apitalist  in  its  undertakings  with  state<apitalist 
relationships,  the  only  lawful  and  positive  actions  its  function¬ 
aries  can  take  are  the  ones  that  improve  their  work  and  reduce 
the  pressure  and  irresponsibility  of  state  administration.  The 
Communists  do  not  admit  in  theory  that  they  are  working  in 
a  system  of  state  capitalism,  but  their  leaders  behave  this  way. 
They  continually  boast  about  improving  the  work  of  the  ad¬ 
ministration  and  about  leading  the  struggle  “against  bureau¬ 
cratism.” 

Moreover,  actual  relationships  are  not  those  of  state  capital¬ 
ism;  these  relationships  do  not  provide  a  method  of  improving 
the  system  of  state  administration  basically. 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  REVOLUTION  S5 

In  order  to  establish  the  nature  of  relationships  which  arise 
in  the  course  of  the  Communist  revolution  and  ultimately  be¬ 
come  established  in  the  process  of  industrialization  and  collectiv¬ 
ization,  it  is  necessary  to  peer  further  into  the  role  and  manner 
of  operation  of  the  state  under  Communism.  At  present,  it  will 
be  sufficient  to  point  out  that  in  Communism  the  state  ma¬ 
chinery  is  not  the  instrument  which  really  determines  social 
and  property  relationships;  it  is  only  the  instrument  by  which 
these  relationships  are  protected.  In  truth,  everything  is  accom¬ 
plished  in  the  name  of  the  state  and  through  its  regulations. 
The  Communist  Party,  including  the  professional  party  bureau¬ 
cracy,  stands  above  the  regulations  and  behind  every  single  one 
of  the  state’s  acts. 

It  is  the  bureaucracy  which  formally  uses,  administers,  and 
controls  both  nationalized  and  socialized  property  as  well  as 
the  entire  life  of  society.  The  role  of  the  bureaucracy  in  society, 
i.e.,  monopolistic  administration  and  control  of  national  in¬ 
come  and  national  goods,  consigns  it  to  a  special  privileged 
jjosition.  Social  relations  resemble  state  capitalism.  The  more 
so,  because  the  carrying  out  of  industrialization  is  effected  not 
with  the  help  of  capitalists  but  with  the  help  of  the  state  ma¬ 
chine.  In  fact,  this  privileged  class  performs  that  function,  using 
the  state  machine  as  a  cover  and  as  an  instrument. 

Ownership  is  nothing  other  than  the  right  of  profit  and  con¬ 
trol.  If  one  defines  class  benefits  by  this  right,  the  Communist 
states  have  seen,  in  the  final  analysis,  the  origin  of  a  new  form 
of  ownership  or  of  a  new  ruling  and  exploiting  class. 

In  reality,  the  Communists  were  unable  to  act  differently 
from  any  ruling  class  that  preceded  them.  Believing  that 
they  were  building  a  new  and  ideal  society,  they  built  it  for 
themselves  in  the  only  way  they  could.  Their  revolution  and 
their  society  do  not  appear  either  accidental  or  unnatural,  but 
appear  as  a  matter  of  course  for  a  particular  country  and  for 
prescribed  periods  of  its  development.  Because  of  this,  no  mat¬ 
ter  how  extensive  and  inhuman  Communist  tyranny  has  been. 


36 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


society,  in  the  course  o£  a  certain  period— as  long  as  industrial¬ 
ization  lasts— has  to  and  is  able  to  endure  this  tyranny.  Further¬ 
more,  this  tyranny  no  longer  appears  as  something  inevitable, 
but  exclusively  as  an  assurance  of  the  depredations  and  priv¬ 
ileges  of  a  new  class. 

In  contrast  to  earlier  revolutions,  the  Communist  revolution, 
conducted  in  the  name  of  doing  away  with  classes,  has  resulted 
in  the  most  complete  authority  of  any  single  new  class.  Every¬ 
thing  else  is  sham  and  an  illusion. 


The  New  Class 


1. 


Everything  happened  differently  in  the  U.S.S.R.  and  other 
Communist  countries  from  what  the  leaders— even  such  promi¬ 
nent  ones  as  Lenin,  Stalin,  Trotsky,  and  Bukharin— anticipated. 
They  expected  that  the  state  would  rapidly  wither  away,  that 
democracy  would  be  strengthened.  The  reverse  happened.  They 
expected  a  rapid  improvement  in  the  standard  of  living— there 
has  been  scarcely  any  change  in  this  respect  and,  in  the  sub¬ 
jugated  East  European  countries,  the  standard  has  even  de¬ 
clined.  In  every  instance,  the  standard  of  living  has  failed  to 
rise  in  proportion  to  the  rate  of  industrialization,  which  was 
much  more  rapid.  It  was  believed  that  the  differences  between 
cities  and  villages,  between  intellectual  and  physical  labor, 
would  slowly  disappear;  instead  these  differences  have  in¬ 
creased.  Communist  anticipations  in  other  areas— including 
their  expectations  for  developments  in  the  non-Communist 
world— have  also  failed  to  materialize. 

The  greatest  illusion  was  that  industrialization  and  collectiv¬ 
ization  in  the  U.S.S.R.,  and  destruction  of  capitalist  ownership, 
would  result  in  a  classless  society.  In  1936,  when  the  new 
Constitution  was  promulgated,  Stalin  announced  that  the  "ex¬ 
ploiting  class”  had  ceased  to  exist.  The  capitalist  and  other 


57 


38 


THE  NEW  CLASS. 


classes  of  ancient  origin  had  in  fact  been  destroyed,  but  a  new 
class,  previously  unknotvn  to  history,  had  been  formed. 

It  is  understandable  that  this  class,  like  those  before  it,  should 
believe  that  the  establishment  of  its  power  would  result  in 
happiness  and  freedom  for  all  men.  The  only  difference  be¬ 
tween  this  and  other  classes  was  that  it  treated  the  delay  in  the 
realization  of  its  illusions  more  crudely.  It  thus  affirmed  that 
its  power  tvas  more  complete  than  the  power  of  any  other  class 
before  in  history,  and  its  class  illusions  and  prejudices  were 
proportionally  greater. 

This  netv  class,  the  bureaucracy,  or  more  accurately  the  polit¬ 
ical  bureaucracy,  has  all  the  characteristics  of  earlier  ones  as 
tvell  as  some  new  characteristics  of  its  otvn.  Its  origin  had  its 
special  characteristics  also,  even  though  in  essence  it  was  similar 
to  the  beginnings  of  other  classes. 

Other  classes,  too,  obtained  their  strength  and  power  by  the 
revolutionary  path,  destroying  the  political,  social,  and  other 
orders  they  met  in  their  tvay.  However,  almost  without  excep¬ 
tion,  these  classes  attained  power  after  new  economic  patterns 
had  taken  shape  in  the  old  society.  The  case  was  the  reverse 
w'ith  new  classes  in  the  Communist  systems.  It  did  not  come 
to  power  to  complete  a  new  economic  order  but  to  establish 
its  own  and.  in  so  doing,  to  establish  its  power  over  society. 

In  earlier  epochs  the  coming  to  power  of  some  class,  some 
part  of  a  class,  or  of  some  party,  was  the  final  event  resulting 
from  its  formation  and  its  development.  The  reverse  was  true 
in  the  U.S.S.R.  There  the  new  class  tvas  definitely  formed  after 
it  attained  power.  Its  consciousness  had  to  develop  before  its 
economic  and  physical  powers,  because  the  class  had  not  taken 
root  in  the  life  of  the  nation.  This  class  viewed  its  role  in 
relation  to  the  tvorld  from  an  idealistic  point  of  view.  Its 
practical  possibilities  were  not  diminished  by  this.  In  spite  of 
its  illusions,  it  represented  an  objective  tendency  toward  in¬ 
dustrialization.  Its  practical  bent  emanated  from  this  tendency. 
The  promise  of  an  ideal  world  increased  the  faith  in  the  ranks 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


39 


of  the  new  class  and  sowed  illusions  among  the  masses.  At  the 
same  time  it  inspired  gigantic  physical  undertakings. 

Because  this  new  class  had  not  been  formed  as  a  part  of  the 
economic  and  social  life  before  it  came  to  potver,  it  could  only 
be  created  in  an  organization  of  a  special  type,  distinguished  by 
a  special  discipline  based  on  identical  philosophic  and  ideologi¬ 
cal  views  of  its  members.  A  unity  of  belief  and  iron  discipline 
was  necessary  to  overcome  its  weaknesses. 

The  roots  of  the  new  class  were  implanted  in  a  special  party, 
of  the  Bolshevik  type.  Lenin  was  right  in  his  view  that  his  party 
was  an  exception  in  the  history  of  human  society,  although  he 
did  not  suspect  that  it  would  be  the  beginning  of  a  new  class. 

To  be  more  precise,  the  initiators  of  the  new  class  are  not 
found  in  the  party  of  the  Bolshevik  type  as  a  tvhole  but  in  that 
stratum  of  professional  revolutionaries  who  made  up  its  core 
even  before  it  attained  power.  It  was  not  by  accident  that  Lenin 
asserted  after  the  failure  of  the  1905  revolution  that  only  pro¬ 
fessional  revolutionaries— men  whose  sole  profession  was  revolu¬ 
tionary  work— could  build  a  new  party  of  the  Bolshevik  type. 
It  was  still  less  accidental  that  even  Stalin,  the  future  creator  of 
a  new  class,  was  the  most  outstanding  example  of  such  a 
professional  revolutionary.  The  netv  ruling  class  has  been  grad¬ 
ually  developing  from  this  very  narrotv  stratum  of  revolution¬ 
aries.  These  revolutionaries  composed  its  core  for  a  long  period. 
Trotsky  noted  that  in  pre-revolutionary  professional  revolu¬ 
tionaries  was  the  origin  of  the  future  Stalinist  bureaucrat. 
W'hat  he  did  not  detect  was  the  beginning  of  a  new  class  of 
otvners  and  exploiters. 

This  is  not  to  say  that  the  new  party  and  the  new  class  are 
identical.  The  party,  however,  is  the  core  of  that  class,  and  its 
base.  It  is  very  difficult,  perhaps  impossible,  to  define  the  limits 
of  the  new  class  and  to  identify  its  members.  The  new  class  may 
be  said  to  be  made  up  of  those  tvho  have  special  privileges  and 
economic  preference  because  of  the  administrative  monopoly 
they  hold. 


40 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


Since  administration  is  unavoidable  in  society,  necessary 
administrative  functions  may  be  coexistent  with  parasitic  func¬ 
tions  in  the  same  person.  Not  every  member  of  the  party  is  a 
member  of  the  new  class,  any  more  than  every  artisan  or  mem¬ 
ber  of  the  city  party  was  a  bourgeois. 

In  loose  terms,  as  the  new  class  becomes  stronger  and  attains 
a  more  perceptible  physiognomy,  the  role  of  the  party  di¬ 
minishes.  The  core  and  the  basis  of  the  new  class  is  created  in 
the  party  and  at  its  top,  as  well  as  in  the  state  political  organs. 
The  once  live,  compact  party,  full  of  initiative,  is  disappearing 
to  become  transformed  into  the  traditional  oligarchy  of  the  new 
class,  irresistibly  drawing  into  its  ranks  those  who  aspire  to 
join  the  new  class  and  repressing  those  who  have  any  ideals. 

The  party  makes  the  class,  but  the  class  grows  as  a  result  and 
uses  the  party  as  a  basis.  The  class  grows  stronger,  while  the 
party  grows  weaker;  this  is  the  inescapable  fate  of  every  Com¬ 
munist  party  in  power. 

If  it  were  not  materially  interested  in  production  or  if  it  did 
not  have  within  itself  the  potentialities  for  the  creation  of  a 
new  class,  no  party  could  act  in  so  morally  and  ideologically 
foolhardy  a  fashion,  let  alone  stay  in  power  for  long.  Stalin 
declared,  after  the  end  of  the  First  Five-Year  Plan:  “If  we  had 
not  created  the  apparatus,  we  would  have  failedi”  He  should 
have  substituted  “new  class”  for  the  word  “apparatus,”  and 
everything  would  have  been  clearer. 

It  seems  unusual  that  a  political  party  could  be  the  beginning 
of  a  new  class.  Parties  are  generally  the  product  of  classes  and 
strata  which  have  become  intellectually  and  economically 
strong.  However,  if  one  grasps  the  actual  conditions  in  pre¬ 
revolutionary  Russia  and  in  other  countries  in  which  Com¬ 
munism  prevailed  over  national  forces,  it  will  be  clear  that  a 
party  of  this  type  is  the  product  of  specific  opportunities  and 
that  there  is  nothing  unusual  or  accidental  in  this  being  so. 
Although  the  roots  of  Bolshevism  reach  far  back  into  Russian 
history,  the  party  is  partly  the  product  of  the  unique  pattern 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


41 


of  international  relationships  in  which  Russia  found  itself  at 
the  end  of  the  nineteenth  and  the  begininng  of  the  twentieth 
century.  Russia  was  no  longer  able  to  live  in  the  modern  world 
as  an  absolute  monarchy,  and  Russia’s  capitalism  was  too  weak 
and  too  dependent  on  the  interests  of  foreign  powers  to  make 
it  possible  to  have  an  industrial  revolution.  This  revolution 
could  only  be  implemented  by  a  new  class,  or  by  a  change  in 
the  social  order.  As  yet,  there  was  no  such  class. 

In  history,  it  is  not  important  who  implements  a  process,  it 
is  only  important  that  the  process  be  implemented.  Such  was 
the  case  in  Russia  and  other  countries  in  which  Communist 
revolutions  took  place.  The  revolution  created  forces,  leaders, 
organizations,  and  ideas  which  were  necessary  to  it.  The  new 
class  came  into  existence  for  objective  reasons,  and  by  the  wish, 
wits,  and  action  of  its  leaders. 


2. 


The  social  origin  of  the  new  class  lies  in  the  proletariat  just 
as  the  aristocracy  arose  in  a  peasant  society,  and  the  bourgeoisie 
in  a  commercial  and  artisans’  society.  There  are  exceptions, 
depending  on  national  conditions,  but  the  proletariat  in  eco¬ 
nomically  underdeveloped  countries,  being  backward,  consti¬ 
tutes  the  raw  material  from  which  the  new  class  arises. 

There  are  other  reasons  why  the  new  class  always  acts  as  the 
champion  of  the  working  class.  The  new  class  is  anti-capitalistic 
and,  consequently,  logically  dependent  upon  the  working  strata. 
The  new  class  is  supported  by  the  proletarian  struggle  and  the 
traditional  faith  of  the  proletariat  in  a  socialist.  Communist 
society  where  there  is  no  brutal  exploitation.  It  is  vitally  im¬ 
portant  for  the  new  class  to  assure  a  normal  flow  of  production, 
hence  it  cannot  ever  lose  its  connection  with  the  proletariat. 
Most  important  of  all,  the  new  class  cannot  achieve  industriali¬ 
zation  and  consolidate  its  power  without  the  help  of  the  work- 


42 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


ing  class.  On  the  other  hand,  the  working  class  sees  in  expanded 
industry  the  salvation  from  its  poverty  and  despair.  Over  a  long 
period  of  time,  the  interests,  ideas,  faith,  and  hope  of  the  new 
class,  and  of  parts  of  the  working  class  and  of  the  poor  peasants, 
coincide  and  unite.  Such  mergers  have  occurred  in  the  past 
among  other  widely  different  classes.  Did  not  the  bourgeoisie 
represent  the  peasantry  in  the  struggle  against  the  feudal  lords? 

The  movement  of  the  new  class  toward  power  comes  as  a 
result  of  the  efforts  of  the  proletariat  and  the  poor.  These  are 
the  masses  upon  which  the  party  or  the  new  class  must  lean 
and  with  which  its  interests  are  most  closely  allied.  This  is  true 
until  the  new  class  finally  establishes  its  power  and  authority. 
Over  and  above  this,  the  new  class  is  interested  in  the  prole¬ 
tariat  and  the  poor  only  to  the  extent  necessary  for  developing 
production  and  for  maintaining  in  subjugation  the  most  ag¬ 
gressive  and  rebellious  social  forces. 

The  monopoly  which  the  new  class  establishes  in  the  name 
of  the  working  class  over  the  whole  of  society  is,  primarily,  a 
monopoly  over  the  working  class  itself.  This  monopoly  is  first 
intellectual,  over  the  so-called  avant-garde  proletariat,  and  then 
over  the  whole  proletariat.  This  is  the  biggest  deception  the 
class  must  accomplish,  but  it  shows  that  the  power  and  interests 
of  the  new  class  lie  primarily  in  industry.  Without  industry 
the  new  class  cannot  consolidate  its  position  or  authority. 

Former  sons  of  the  working  class  are  the  most  steadfast  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  new  class.  It  has  always  been  the  fate  of  slaves  to 
provide  for  their  masters  the  most  clever  and  gifted  represen¬ 
tatives.  In  this  case  a  new  exploiting  and  governing  class  is 
born  from  the  exploited  class. 


3. 


When  Communist  systems  are  being  critically  analyzed,  it  is 
considered  that  their  fundamental  distinction  lies  in  the  fact 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


43 


that  a  bureaucracy,  organized  in  a  special  stratum,  rules  over 
the  people.  This  is  generally  true.  However,  a  more  detailed 
analysis  will  show  that  only  a  special  stratum  of  bureaucrats, 
those  who  are  not  administrative  officials,  make  up  the  core  of 
the  governing  bureaucracy,  or,  in  my  terminology,  of  the  new 
class.  This  is  actually  a  party  or  political  bureaucracy.  Other 
officials  are  only  the  apparatus  under  the  conrol  of  the  new 
class;  the  apparatus  may  be  clumsy  and  slow  but,  no  matter 
what,  it  must  exist  in  every  socialist  society.  It  is  sociologically 
f)ossible  to  draw  the  borderline  between  the  different  types  of 
officials,  but  in  practice  they  are  practically  indistinguishable. 
This  is  true  not  only  because  the  Communist  system  by  its  very 
nature  is  bureaucratic,  but  because  Communists  handle  the 
various  important  administrative  functions.  In  addition,  the 
stratum  of  political  bureaucrats  cannot  enjoy  their  privileges 
if  they  do  not  give  crumbs  from  their  tables  to  other  bureau¬ 
cratic  categories. 

It  is  important  to  note  the  fundamental  differences  between 
the  political  bureaucracies  mentioned  here  and  those  which 
arise  tvith  every  centralization  in  modem  economy— especially 
centralizations  that  lead  to  collective  forms  of  otvnership  such 
as  monopolies,  companies,  and  state  ownership.  The  number 
of  white-collar  workers  is  constantly  increasing  in  capitalistic 
monopolies,  and  also  in  nationalized  industries  in  the  West. 
In  Human  Relations  in  Administration  *  R.  Dub  in  says  that 
state  functionaries  in  the  economy  are  being  transformed  into 
a  special  stratum  of  society. 

.  .  .  Functionaries  have  the  sense  of  a  common  destiny  for 
all  those  who  work  together.  They  share  the  same  interests, 
especially  since  there  is  relatively  little  competition  insofar 
as  promotion  is  in  terms  of  seniority.  In-group  aggression  is 
thus  minimized  and  this  arrangement  is  therefore  conceived 


•  New  York,  Prentice-Hall,  1951. 


44 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


to  be  positively  functional  for  the  bureaucracy.  However,  the 
esprit  de  corps  and  informal  social  organization  which  typi¬ 
cally  develops  in  such  situations  often  leads  the  personnel  to 
defend  their  entrenched  interests  rather  than  to  assist  their 
clientele  and  elected  higher  officials. 

While  such  functionaries  have  much  in  common  with  Com¬ 
munist  bureaucrats,  especially  as  regards  “esprit  de  corps,”  they 
are  not  identical.  Although  state  and  other  bureaucrats  in  non- 
Communist  systems  form  a  special  stratum,  they  do  not  exercise 
authority  as  the  Communists  do.  Bureaucrats  in  a  non-Com- 
munist  state  have  political  masters,  usually  elected,  or  owners 
over  them,  while  Communists  have  neither  masters  nor  owners 
over  them.  The  bureaucrats  in  a  non-Communist  state  are  of¬ 
ficials  in  modern  capitalist  economy,  while  the  Communists 
are  something  different  and  new:  a  new  class. 

As  in  other  owning  classes,  the  proof  that  it  is  a  special  class 
lies  in  its  ownership  and  its  special  relations  to  other  classes. 
In  the  same  way,  the  class  to  which  a  member  belongs  is  indi¬ 
cated  by  the  material  and  other  privileges  which  ownership 
brings  to  bim. 

As  defined  by  Roman  law,  property  constitutes  the  use,  en¬ 
joyment,  and  disposition  of  material  goods.  The  Communist 
political  bureaucracy  uses,  enjoys,  and  disposes  of  nationalized 
property. 

If  we  assume  that  membership  in  this  bureaucracy  or  new 
owning  class  is  predicated  on  the  use  of  privileges  inherent  in 
ownership— in  this  instance  nationalized  material  goods— then 
membership  in  the  new  party  class,  or  political  bureaucracy,  is 
reflected  in  a  larger  income  in  material  goods  and  privileges 
than  society  should  normally  grant  for  such  functions.  In  prac¬ 
tice,  the  ownership  privilege  of  the  new  class  manifests  itself 
as  an  exclusive  right,  as  a  party  monopoly,  for  the  political 
bureaucracy  to  distribute  tbe  national  income,  to  set  wages, 
direct  economic  development,  and  dispose  of  nationalized  and 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


45 


other  property.  This  is  the  way  it  appears  to  the  ordinary  man 
who  considers  the  Communist  functionary  as  being  very  rich 
and  as  a  man  who  does  not  have  to  work. 

The  ownership  of  private  property  has,  for  many  reasons, 
proved  to  be  unfavorable  for  the  establishment  of  the  new 
class’s  authority.  Besides,  the  destruction  of  private  ownership 
was  necessary  for  the  economic  transformation  of  nations.  The 
new  class  obtains  its  power,  privileges,  ideology,  and  its  customs 
from  one  specific  form  of  ownership— collective  ownership— 
which  the  class  administers  and  distributes  in  the  name  of  the 
nation  and  society. 

The  new  class  maintains  that  ownership  derives  from  a  desig¬ 
nated  social  relationship.  This  is  the  relationship  between  the 
monopolists  of  administration,  who  constitute  a  narrow  and 
closed  stratum,  and  the  mass  of  producers  (farmers,  workers, 
and  intelligentsia)  who  have  no  rights.  However,  this  relation¬ 
ship  is  not  valid  since  the  Communist  bureaucracy  enjoys  a 
monopoly  over  the  distribution  of  material  goods. 

Every  fundamental  change  in  the  social  relationship  between 
those  who  monopolize  administration  and  those  who  work  is 
inevitably  reflected  in  the  ownership  relationship.  Social  and 
political  relations  and  ownership— the  totalitarianism  of  the 
government  and  the  monopoly  of  authority— are  being  more 
fully  brought  into  accord  in  Communism  than  in  any  other 
single  system. 

To  divest  Communists  of  their  ownership  rights  would  be  to 
abolish  them  as  a  class.  To  compel  them  to  relinquish  their 
other  social  powers,  so  that  workers  may  participate  in  sharing 
the  profits  of  their  work— which  capitalists  have  had  to  permit 
as  a  result  of  strikes  and  parliamentary  action— would  mean 
that  Communists  were  being  deprived  of  their  monopoly  over 
property,  ideology,  and  government.  This  would  be  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  democracy  and  freedom  in  Communism,  the  end  of 
Communist  monopolism  and  totalitarianism.  Until  this  hap¬ 
pens,  there  can  be  no  indication  that  important,  fundamental 


46  THE  NEW  CLASS 

changes  are  taking  place  in  Communist  systems,  at  least  not 
in  the  eyes  of  men  who  think  seriously  about  social  progress. 

The  ownership  privileges  of  the  new  class  and  membership 
in  that  class  are  the  privileges  of  administration.  This  privilege 
extends  from  state  administration  and  the  administration  of 
economic  enterprises  to  that  of  sports  and  humanitarian  organi¬ 
zations.  Political,  party,  or  so-called  “general  leadership”  is 
executed  by  the  core.  This  position  of  leadership  carries  privi¬ 
leges  with  it.  In  his  Stalin  au  pouvoir,  published  in  Paris  in 
1951,  Orlov  states  that  the  average  pay  of  a  worker  in  the 
U.S.S.R  in  1935  was  1,800  rubles  annually,  while  the  pay  and 
allowances  of  the  secretary  of  a  rayon  committee  amounted 
to  45,000  rubles  annually.  The  situation  has  changed  since 
then  for  both  workers  and  party  functionaries,  but  the  essence 
remains  the  same.  Other  authors  have  arrived  at  the  same 
conclusions.  Discrepancies  between  the  pay  of  workers  and 
party  functionaries  are  extreme;  this  could  not  be  hidden  from 
persons  visiting  the  U.S.S.R.  or  other  Communist  countries  in 
the  past  few  years. 

Other  systems,  too,  have  their  professional  politicians.  One 
can  think  well  or  ill  of  them,  but  they  must  exist.  Society 
cannot  live  without  a  state  or  a  government,  and  therefore 
it  cannot  live  without  those  who  fight  for  it. 

However,  there  are  fundamental  differences  between  pro¬ 
fessional  politicians  in  other  systems  and  in  the  Communist 
system.  In  extreme  cases,  politicians  in  other  systems  use  the 
government  to  secure  privileges  for  themselves  and  their  co¬ 
horts,  or  to  favor  the  economic  interests  of  one  social  stratum  or 
another.  The  situation  is  different  with  the  Communist  system 
where  the  power  and  the  government  are  identical  with  the 
use,  enjoyment,  and  disposition  of  almost  all  the  nation’s  goods. 
He  who  grabs  p>otver  grabs  privileges  and  indirectly  grabs 
property.  Consequently,  in  Communism,  power  or  politics  as 
a  profession  is  the  ideal  of  those  who  have  the  desire  or  the 
prospect  of  living  as  parasites  at  the  expense  of  others. 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


47 


Membership  in  the  Communist  Party  before  the  Revolution 
meant  sacrifice.  Being  a  professional  revolutionary  was  one  of 
the  highest  honors.  Now  that  the  party  has  consolidated  its 
power,  party  membership  means  that  one  belongs  to  a  privi¬ 
leged  class.  And  at  the  core  of  the  party  are  the  all-potverful 
exploiters  and  masters. 

For  a  long  time  the  Communist  revolution  and  the  Com¬ 
munist  system  have  been  concealing  their  real  nature.  The 
emergence  of  the  new  class  has  been  concealed  under  socialist 
phraseology  and,  more  important,  under  the  netv  collective 
forms  of  property  ownership.  The  so-called  socialist  ownership 
is  a  disguise  for  the  real  ownership  by  the  political  bureaucracy. 
And  in  the  beginning  this  bureaucracy  was  in  a  hurry  to  com. 
plete  industrialization,  and  hid  its  class  composition  undei 
that  guise. 


4. 


The  development  of  modem  Communism,  and  the  emer¬ 
gence  of  the  nets’  class,  is  evident  in  the  character  and  roles 
of  those  who  inspired  it. 

The  leaders  and  their  methods,  from  Marx  to  Khrushchev, 
have  been  varied  and  changing.  It  never  occurred  to  Marx  to 
prevent  others  from  voicing  their  ideas.  Lenin  tolerated  free 
discussion  in  his  party  and  did  not  think  that  party  forums, 
let  alone  the  party  head,  should  regulate  the  expression  of 
“proper”  or  “improper"  ideas.  Stalin  abolished  every  type  of 
intra-party  discussion,  and  made  the  expression  of  ideology 
solely  the  right  of  the  central  forum— or  of  himself.  Other 
Communist  movements  were  different.  For  instance,  Marx’s 
International  'Workers’  Union  (the  so-called  First  Interna¬ 
tional)  was  not  Marxist  in  ideology,  but  a  union  of  varied 
groups  which  adopted  only  the  resolutions  on  which  its  mem. 
bers  agreed.  Lenin’s  party  was  an  avant-garde  group  combining 


48  THE  NEW  CLAS^ 

an  internal  revolutionary  morality  and  ideological  monolithic 
structure  with  democracy  of  a  kind.  Under  Stalin  the  party 
became  a  mass  of  ideologically  disinterested  men,  who  got 
their  ideas  from  above,  but  were  wholehearted  and  unanimous 
in  the  defense  of  a  system  that  assured  them  unquestionable 
privileges.  Marx  actually  never  created  a  party;  Lenin  de¬ 
stroyed  all  parties  except  his  otvn,  including  the  Socialist  Party. 
Stalin  relegated  even  the  Bolshevik  Party  to  second  rank, 
transforming  its  core  into  the  core  of  the  new  class,  and 
transforming  the  party  into  a  privileged  impersonal  and  color¬ 
less  group. 

Marx  created  a  system  of  the  roles  of  classes,  and  of  class  war 
in  society,  even  though  he  did  not  discover  them,  and  he  saw 
that  mankind  is  mostly  made  up  of  members  of  discernible 
classes,  although  he  was  only  restating  Terence’s  Stoic  philoso¬ 
phy:  “Humani  nihil  a  me  alienum  puto."  Lenin  viewed  men  as 
sharing  ideas  rather  than  as  being  members  of  discernible 
classes.  Stalin  saw  in  men  only  obedient  subjects  or  enemies. 
Marx  died  a  poor  emigrant  in  London,  but  was  valued  by 
learned  men  and  valued  in  the  movement;  Lenin  died  as  the 
leader  of  one  of  the  greatest  revolutions,  but  died  as  a  dictator 
about  whom  a  cult  had  already  begun  to  form;  when  Stalin 
died,  he  had  already  transformed  himself  into  a  god. 

These  changes  in  personalities  are  only  the  reflection  of 
changes  which  had  already  taken  place  and  were  the  very  soul 
of  the  Communist  movement. 

Although  he  did  not  realize  it,  Lenin  started  the  organiza¬ 
tion  of  the  new  class.  He  established  the  party  along  Bolshevik 
lines  and  developed  the  theories  of  its  unique  and  leading  role 
in  the  building  of  a  new  society.  This  is  but  one  aspect  of  his 
many-sided  and  gigantic  work;  it  is  the  aspect  which  came 
about  from  his  actions  rather  than  his  wishes.  It  is  also  the 
aspect  which  led  the  new  class  to  revere  him. 

The  real  and  direct  originator  of  the  new  class,  however, 
was  Stalin.  He  was  a  man  of  quick  reflexes  and  a  tendency  to 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


49 


coarse  humor,  not  very  educated  nor  a  good  speaker.  But  he 
was  a  relentless  dogmatician  and  a  great  administrator,  a 
Georgian  who  knew  better  than  anyone  else  whither  the  new 
powers  of  Greater  Russia  were  taking  her.  He  created  the  new 
class  by  the  use  of  the  most  barbaric  means,  not  even  sparing 
the  class  itself.  It  was  inevitable  that  the  new  class  which 
placed  him  at  the  top  would  later  submit  to  his  unbridled 
and  brutal  nature.  He  was  the  true  leader  of  that  class  as  long 
as  the  class  was  building  itself  up,  and  attaining  power. 

The  new  class  was  born  in  the  revolutionary  struggle  in  the 
Communist  Party,  but  was  developed  in  the  industrial  revolu¬ 
tion.  Without  the  revolution,  without  industry,  the  class’s 
position  would  not  have  been  secure  and  its  power  would 
have  been  limited. 

While  the  country  was  being  industrialized,  Stalin  began 
to  introduce  considerable  variations  in  wages,  at  the  same 
time  allowing  the  development  toward  various  privileges  to 
proceed.  He  thought  that  industrialization  would  come  to 
nothing  if  the  new  class  were  not  made  materially  interested 
in  the  process,  by  acquisition  of  some  property  for  itself.  With¬ 
out  industrialization  the  new  class  would  find  it  difficult  to 
hold  its  position,  for  it  would  have  neither  historical  justifica¬ 
tion  nor  the  material  resources  for  its  continued  existence. 

The  increase  in  the  membership  of  the  party,  or  of  the 
bureaucracy,  was  closely  connected  with  this.  In  1927,  on  the 
eve  of  industrialization,  the  Soviet  Communist  Party  had 
887,233  members.  In  1934,  at  the  end  of  the  First  Five-Year 
Plan,  the  membership  had  increased  to  1,874,488.  This  was 
a  phenomenon  obviously  connected  with  industrialization:  the 
prospects  for  the  new  class  and  privileges  for  its  members  were 
improving.  What  is  more,  the  privileges  and  the  class  were 
expanding  more  rapidly  than  industrialization  itself.  It  is  diffi¬ 
cult  to  cite  any  statistics  on  this  point,  but  the  conclusion  is 
self-evident  for  anyone  who  bears  in  mind  that  the  standard 
of  living  has  not  kept  pace  with  industrial  production,  while 


50 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


the  new  cIeiss  actually  seized  the  lion’s  share  of  the  economic 
and  other  progress  earned  by  the  sacrifices  and  efforts  of  the 
masses. 

The  establishment  of  the  new  class  did  not  proceed  smoothly. 
It  encountered  bitter  opposition  from  existing  classes  and  from 
those  revolutionaries  who  could  not  reconcile  reality  with  the 
ideals  of  their  struggle.  In  the  U.S.S.R.  the  opposition  of 
revolutionaries  was  most  evident  in  the  Trotsky-Stalin  conflict. 
The  conflict  between  Trotsky  and  Stalin,  or  between  opposi¬ 
tionists  in  the  party  and  Stalin,  as  well  as  the  conflict  between 
the  regime  and  the  peasantry,  became  more  intense  as  indus¬ 
trialization  advanced  and  the  power  and  authority  of  the  new 
class  increased. 

Trotsky,  an  excellent  speaker,  brilliant  stylist,  and  skilled 
polemicist,  a  man  cultured  and  of  excellent  intelligence,  was 
deficient  in  only  one  quality:  a  sense  of  reality.  He  wanted  to 
be  a  revolutionary  in  a  period  when  life  imposed  the  common¬ 
place.  He  wished  to  revive  a  revolutionary  party  which  weis 
being  transformed  into  something  completely  different,  into 
a  new  class  unconcerned  with  great  ideals  and  interested  only 
in  the  everyday  pleasures  of  life.  He  expected  action  from  a 
mass  already  tired  by  war,  hunger,  and  death,  at  a  time  when 
the  new  class  already  strongly  held  the  reins  and  had  begun 
to  experience  the  sweetness  of  privilege.  Trotsky’s  fireworks 
lit  up  the  distant  heavens;  but  he  could  not  rekindle  fires  in 
weary  men.  He  sharply  noted  the  sorry  aspect  of  the  new 
phenomena  but  he  did  not  gTEisp  their  meaning.  In  addition, 
he  had  never  been  a  Bolshevik.  This  was  his  vice  and  his 
virtue.  Attacking  the  party  bureaucracy  in  the  name  of  the 
revolution,  he  attacked  the  cult  of  the  party  and,  although  he 
was  not  conscious  of  it,  the  new  class. 

Stalin  looked  neither  far  ahead  nor  far  behind.  He  had 
seated  himself  at  the  head  of  the  new  power  which  was  being 
born— the  new  class,  the  political  bureaucracy,  and  bureau¬ 
cratism— and  became  its  leader  and  organizer.  He  did  not  preach 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


51 


—he  made  decisions.  He  too  promised  a  shining  future,  but 
one  which  bureaucracy  could  visualize  as  being  real  because 
its  life  was  improving  from  day  to  day  and  its  position  was 
being  strengthened.  He  spoke  without  ardor  and  color,  but 
the  new  class  was  better  able  to  understand  this  kind  of  realistic 
language.  Trotsky  wished  to  extend  the  revolution  to  Europe; 
Stalin  was  not  opposed  to  the  idea  but  this  hazardous  under¬ 
taking  did  not  prevent  him  from  worrying  about  Mother 
Russia  or,  specifically,  about  ways  of  strengthening  the  new 
system  and  increasing  the  power  and  reputation  of  the  Russian 
state.  Trotsky  was  a  man  of  the  revolution  of  the  past;  Stalin 
was  a  man  of  today  and,  thus,  of  the  future. 

In  Stalin’s  victory  Trotsky  saw  the  Thermidoric  reaction 
against  the  revolution,  actually  the  bureaucratic  corruption 
of  the  Soviet  government  and  the  revolutionary  cause.  Conse¬ 
quently,  he  understood  and  was  deeply  hurt  by  the  amorality 
of  Stalin’s  methods.  Trotsky  was  the  first,  although  he  was  not 
aware  of  it,  who  in  the  attempt  to  save  the  Communist  move¬ 
ment  discovered  the  essence  of  contemporary  Communism.  But 
he  was  not  capable  of  seeing  it  through  to  the  end.  He  supposed 
that  this  was  only  a  momentary  cropping  up  of  bureaucracy, 
corrupting  the  party  and  the  revolution,  and  concluded  that 
the  solution  was  in  a  change  at  the  top,  in  a  “palace  revolu¬ 
tion.”  When  a  palace  revolution  actually  took  place  after 
Stalin’s  death,  it  could  be  seen  that  the  essence  had  not 
changed;  something  deeper  and  more  lasting  was  involved.  The 
Soviet  Thermidor  of  Stalin  had  not  only  led  to  the  installation 
of  a  government  more  despotic  than  the  previous  one,  but  also 
to  the  installation  of  a  class.  This  was  the  continuation  of  that 
other  violent  foreign  revolution  which  had  inevitably  borne 
and  strengthened  the  new  class. 

Stalin  could,  with  equal  if  not  greater  right,  refer  to  Lenin 
and  all  the  revolution,  just  as  Trotsky  did.  For  Stalin  was  the 
lawful  although  wicked  offspring  of  Lenin  and  the  revolution. 

History  has  no  previous  record  of  a  personality  like  Lenin 


52 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


who,  by  his  versatility  and  persistence,  developed  one  of  the 
greatest  revolutions  known  to  men.  It  also  has  no  record  of  a 
personality  like  Stalin,  who  took  on  the  enormous  task  of 
strengthening,  in  terms  of  power  and  property,  a  new  class  bom 
out  of  one  of  the  greatest  revolutions  in  one  of  the  largest  of 
the  world’s  countries. 

Behind  Lenin,  who  was  all  passion  and  thought,  stands  the 
dull,  gray  figure  of  Joseph  Stalin,  the  symbol  of  the  difficult, 
cruel,  and  unscrupulous  ascent  of  the  new  class  to  its  final 
power. 

After  Lenin  and  Stalin  came  what  had  to  come;  namely, 
mediocrity  in  the  form  of  collective  leadership.  And  also  there 
came  the  apparently  sincere,  kind-hearted,  non-intellectual  “man 
of  the  people”— Nikita  Khrushchev.  The  new  class  no  longer 
needs  the  revolutionaries  or  dogmatists  it  once  required;  it  is 
satisfied  with  simple  personalities,  such  as  Khrushchev,  Malen¬ 
kov,  Bulganin,  and  Shepilov,  whose  every  word  reflects  the  aver¬ 
age  man.  The  new  class  itself  is  tired  of  dogmatic  purges  and 
training  sessions.  It  would  like  to  live  quietly.  It  must  protect 
itself  even  from  its  own  authorized  leader  now  that  it  has  been 
adequately  strengthened.  Stalin  remained  the  same  as  he  was 
when  the  class  was  weak,  when  cruel  measures  were  necessary 
against  even  those  in  its  otvn  ranks  who  threatened  to  deviate. 
Today  this  is  all  unnecessary.  Without  relinquishing  anything 
it  created  under  Stalin’s  leadership,  the  new  class  appears  to 
be  renouncing  his  authority  for  the  past  few  years.  But  it  is 
not  really  renouncing  that  authority— only  Stalin’s  methods 
which,  according  to  Khrushchev,  hurt  “good  Communists.” 

Lenin’s  revolutionary  epoch  was  replaced  by  Stalin’s  epoch, 
in  which  authority  and  ownership,  and  industrialization,  were 
strengthened  so  that  the  much  desired  peaceful  and  good  life 
of  the  new  class  could  begin.  Lenin’s  revolutionary  Commu¬ 
nism  was  replaced  by  Stalin’s  dogmatic  communism,  which  in 


53 


THE  NEW  CLASS 
turn  was  replaced  by  non-dogmatic  Communism,  a  so-called 
collective  leadership  or  a  group  of  oligarchs. 

These  are  the  three  phases  of  development  of  the  new  class 
in  the  U.S.S.R.  or  of  Russian  Communism  (or  of  every  other 
type  of  Communism  in  one  manner  or  another) . 

The  fate  of  Yugoslav  Communism  was  to  unify  these  three 
phases  in  the  single  personality  of  Tito,  along  with  national 
and  personal  characteristics.  Tito  is  a  great  revolutionary,  but 
without  original  ideas;  he  has  attained  personal  power,  but 
without  Stalin’s  distrustfulness  and  dogmatism.  Like  Khrush¬ 
chev,  Tito  is  a  representative  of  the  people,  that  is,  of  the  mid¬ 
dle-party  strata.  The  road  which  Yugoslav  Communism  has 
traveled— attaining  a  revolution,  copying  Stalinism,  then  re¬ 
nouncing  Stalinism  and  seeking  its  own  form— is  seen  most  fully 
in  the  personality  of  Tito.  Yugoslav  Communism  has  been 
more  consistent  than  other  parties  in  preserving  the  substance 
of  Communism,  yet  never  renouncing  any  form  which  could  be 
of  value  to  it. 

The  three  phases  in  the  development  of  the  new  class— 
Lenin,  Stalin,  and  “collective  leadership’’— are  not  completely 
divorced  from  each  other,  in  substance  or  in  ideas. 

Lenin  too  was  a  dogmatist,  and  Stalin  too  was  a  revolutionary, 
just  as  collective  leadership  will  resort  to  dogmatism  and  to 
revolutionary  methods  when  necessary.  What  is  more,  the  non¬ 
dogmatism  of  the  collective  leadership  is  applied  only  to  itself, 
to  the  heads  of  the  new  class.  On  the  other  hand,  the  people 
must  be  all  the  more  persistently  “educated”  in  the  spirit  of 
the  dogma,  or  of  Marxism-Leninism.  By  relaxing  its  dogmatic 
severity  and  exclusiveness,  the  new  class,  becoming  strengthened 
economically,  has  prospects  of  attaining  greater  flexibility. 

The  heroic  era  of  Communism  is  past.  The  epoch  of  its 
great  leaders  has  ended.  The  epoch  of  practical  men  has  set 
in.  The  new  class  has  been  created.  It  is  at  the  height  of  its 


54  THE  NEW  CLASS 

power  and  wealth,  but  it  is  without  new  ideas.  It  has  nothing 
more  to  tell  the  people.  The  only  thing  that  remains  is  for 
it  to  justify  itself. 


5. 

It  would  not  be  important  to  establish  the  fact  that  in  con¬ 
temporary  Communism  a  new  owning  and  exploiting  class  is 
involved  and  not  merely  a  temporary  dictatorship  and  an  arbi¬ 
trary  bureaucracy,  if  some  anti-Stalinist  Communists  including 
Trotsky  as  well  as  some  Social  Democrats  had  not  depicted  the 
ruling  stratum  as  a  passing  bureaucratic  phenomenon  because 
of  which  this  new  ideal,  classless  society,  still  in  its  swaddling 
clothes,  must  suffer,  just  as  bourgeois  society  had  had  to  suffer 
under  Cromwell’s  and  Napoleon’s  despotism. 

But  the  new  class  is  really  a  new  class,  with  a  special  com¬ 
position  and  special  power.  By  any  scientific  definition  of  a 
class,  even  the  Marxist  definition  by  which  some  classes  are 
lower  than  others  according  to  their  specific  position  in  pro¬ 
duction,  we  conclude  that,  in  the  U.S.S.R.  and  other  Com¬ 
munist  countries,  a  new  class  of  owners  and  exploiters  is  in 
existence.  The  specific  characteristic  of  this  new  class  is  its 
collective  ownership.  Communist  theoreticians  affirm,  and  some 
even  believe,  that  Communism  has  arrived  at  collective  owner¬ 
ship. 

Collective  ownership  in  various  forms  has  existed  in  all 
earlier  societies.  All  ancient  Eastern  despotisms  were  based  on 
the  pre-eminence  of  the  state’s  or  the  king’s  property.  In  ancient 
Egypt  after  the  fifteenth  century  b.c.,  arable  land  passed  to 
private  ownership.  Before  that  time  only  homes  and  surround¬ 
ing  buildings  had  been  privately  owned.  State  land  was  handed 
over  for  cultivation  while  state  officials  administered  the  land 
and  collected  taxes  on  it.  Canals  and  installations,  as  well  as 
the  most  important  works,  were  also  state-owned.  The  state 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


55 


owned  everything  until  it  lost  its  independence  in  the  first 
century  of  our  era. 

This  helps  to  explain  the  deification  of  the  Pharaohs  of 
Egypt  and  of  the  emperors,  which  one  encounters  in  all  the 
ancient  Eastern  despotisms.  Such  ownership  also  explains  the 
undertaking  of  gigantic  tasks,  such  as  the  construction  of 
temples,  tombs,  and  castles  of  emperors,  of  canals,  roads,  and 
fortifications. 

The  Roman  state  treated  newly  conquered  land  as  state  land 
and  owned  considerable  numbers  of  slaves.  The  medieval 
Church  also  had  collective  property. 

Capitalism  by  its  very  nature  was  an  enemy  of  collective  own¬ 
ership  until  the  establishment  of  shareholders’  organizations. 
Capitalism  continued  to  be  an  enemy  of  collective  ownership, 
even  though  it  could  not  do  anything  against  new  encroach¬ 
ments  by  collective  ownership  and  the  enlargement  of  its  area 
of  operations. 

The  Communists  did  not  invent  collective  ownership  as 
such,  but  invented  its  all-encompassing  character,  more  widely 
extended  than  in  earlier  epochs,  even  more  extensive  than  in 
Pharaoh’s  Egypt.  That  is  all  that  the  Communists  did. 

The  ownership  of  the  new  class,  as  well  as  its  character,  was 
formed  over  a  period  of  time  and  was  subjected  to  constant 
change  during  the  process.  At  first,  only  a  small  part  of  the 
nation  felt  the  need  for  all  economic  powers  to  be  placed  in 
the  hands  of  a  political  party  for  the  purpose  of  aiding  the 
industrial  transformation.  The  party,  acting  as  the  avant-garde 
of  the  proletariat  and  as  the  “most  enlightened  power  of  so¬ 
cialism,”  pressed  for  this  centralization  which  could  be  attained 
only  by  a  change  in  ownership.  The  change  was  made  in  fact 
and  in  form  through  nationalization  first  of  large  enterprises 
and  then  of  smaller  ones.  The  abolition  of  private  ownership 
was  a  prerequisite  for  industrialization,  and  for  the  beginning 
of  the  new  class.  However,  without  their  special  role  as  ad¬ 
ministrators  over  society  and  as  distributors  of  property,  the 


56  THE  NEW  CLASH 

Communists  could  not  transform  themselves  into  a  new  class, 
nor  could  a  new  class  be  formed  and  permanently  established. 
Gradually  material  goods  were  nationalized,  but  in  fact,  through 
its  right  to  use,  enjoy,  and  distribute  these  goods,  they  became 
the  property  of  a  discernible  stratum  of  the  party  and  the 
bureaucracy  gathered  around  it. 

In  view  of  the  significance  of  ownership  for  its  power— and 
also  of  the  fruits  of  ownership— the  party  bureaucracy  cannot 
renounce  the  extension  of  its  ownership  even  over  small-scale 
production  facilities.  Because  of  its  totalitarianism  and  monopo¬ 
lism,  the  new  class  finds  itself  unavoidably  at  war  with  every¬ 
thing  which  it  does  not  administer  or  handle,  and  must 
deliberately  aspire  to  destroy  or  conquer  it. 

Stalin  said,  on  the  eve  of  collectivization,  that  the  question 
of  “who  will  do  what  to  whom”  had  been  raised,  even  though 
the  Soviet  government  was  not  meeting  serious  opposition 
from  a  politically  and  economically  disunited  peasantry.  The 
new  class  felt  insecure  as  long  as  there  were  any  other  owners 
except  itself.  It  could  not  risk  sabotage  in  food  supplies  or  in 
agricultural  raw  materials.  This  was  the  direct  reason  for  the 
attack  on  the  peasantry.  However,  there  was  a  second  reason, 
a  class  reason:  the  peasants  could  be  dangerous  to  the  new 
class  in  an  unstable  situation.  The  new  class  therefore  had 
to  subordinate  the  peasantry  to  itself  economically  and 
administratively;  this  was  done  through  the  kolkhozes  and 
machine-tractor  stations,  which  required  an  increase  propor¬ 
tionate  to  the  size  of  the  new  class  in  the  villages  themselves. 
As  a  result,  bureaucracy  mushroomed  in  the  villages  too. 

The  fact  that  the  seizure  of  property  from  other  classes, 
especially  from  small  owners,  led  to  decreases  in  production 
and  to  chaos  in  the  economy  was  of  no  consequence  to  the  new 
class.  Most  important  for  the  new  class,  as  for  every  owner  in 
history,  was  the  attainment  and  consolidation  of  ownership. 
The  class  profited  from  the  new  property  it  had  acquired  even 
though  the  nation  lost  thereby.  The  collectivization  of  peasant 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


57 


holdings,  which  was  economically  unjustified,  was  unavoidable 
if  the  new  class  was  to  be  securely  installed  in  its  power  and 
its  ownership. 

Reliable  statistics  are  not  available,  but  all  evidence  confirms 
that  yields  per  acre  in  the  U.S.S.R.  have  not  been  increased 
over  the  yields  in  Czarist  Russia,  and  that  the  number  of  live¬ 
stock  still  does  not  approach  the  pre-revolutionary  figure. 

The  losses  in  agricultural  yields  and  in  livestock  can  be 
calculated,  but  the  losses  in  manpower,  in  the  millions  of  peas¬ 
ants  who  were  thrown  into  labor  camps,  are  incalculable. 
Collectivization  was  a  frightful  and  devastating  war  which  re¬ 
sembled  an  insane  undertaking— except  for  the  fact  that  it  was 
profitable  for  the  new  class  by  assuring  its  authority. 

By  various  methods,  such  as  nationalization,  compulsory  co¬ 
operation,  high  taxes,  and  price  inequalities,  private  ownership 
was  destroyed  and  transformed  into  collective  ownership.  The 
establishment  of  the  ownership  of  the  new  class  was  evidenced 
in  the  changes  in  the  psychology,  the  way  of  life,  and  the 
material  position  of  its  members,  depending  on  the  position 
they  held  on  the  hierarchical  ladder.  Country  homes,  the  best 
housing,  furniture,  and  similar  things  were  acquired:  special 
quarters  and  exclusive  rest  homes  were  established  for  the 
highest  bureaucracy,  for  the  elite  of  the  new  class.  The  party 
secretary  and  the  chief  of  the  secret  police  in  some  places  not 
only  became  the  highest  authorities  but  obtained  the  best  hous¬ 
ing,  automobiles,  and  similar  evidence  of  privilege.  Those 
beneath  them  were  eligible  for  comparable  privileges,  depend¬ 
ing  upon  their  position  in  the  hierarchy.  The  state  budgets, 
“gifts,”  and  the  construction  and  reconstruction  executed  for 
the  needs  of  the  state  and  its  representatives  became  the  ever¬ 
lasting  and  inexhaustible  sources  of  benefits  to  the  political 
bureaucracy. 

Only  in  cases  where  the  new  class  was  not  capable  of 
maintaining  the  ownership  it  had  usurped,  or  in  cases 
where  such  ownership  was  exorbitandy  expensive  or  politically 


58 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


dangerous,  the  ownership  surrendered  to  other  strata  or  other 
forms  of  ownership  were  devised.  For  example,  collectivization 
was  abandoned  in  Yugoslavia  because  the  peasants  were  resist¬ 
ing  it  and  because  the  steady  decrease  in  production  resulting 
from  collectivization  held  a  latent  danger  for  the  regime.  How¬ 
ever,  the  new  class  never  renounced  the  right  in  such  cases  to 
seize  ownership  again  or  to  collectivize.  The  new  class  cannot 
renounce  this  right,  for  if  it  did,  it  would  no  longer  be  total¬ 
itarian  and  monopolistic. 

No  bureaucracy  alone  could  be  so  stubborn  in  its  pur¬ 
poses  and  aims.  Only  those  engaged  in  new  forms  of  ownership, 
who  tread  the  road  to  new  forms  of  production,  are  capable  of 
being  so  persistent. 

Marx  foresaw  that  after  its  victory  the  proletariat  would  be 
exposed  to  danger  from  the  deposed  classes  and  from  its  own 
bureaucracy.  When  the  Communists,  especially  those  in  Yugo¬ 
slavia,  criticize  Stalin’s  administration  and  bureaucratic  meth¬ 
ods,  they  generally  refer  to  what  Marx  anticipated.  However, 
what  is  happening  in  Communism  today  has  little  connection 
with  Marx  and  certainly  no  connection  with  this  anticipation. 
Marx  was  thinking  of  the  danger  from  an  increase  in  a  parasitic 
bureaucracy,  which  is  also  present  in  contemporary  Com¬ 
munism.  It  never  occured  to  him  that  today’s  Communist 
strong  men,  who  handle  material  goods  on  behalf  of  their  own 
narrow  caste’s  interests  rather  than  for  the  bureaucracy  as  a 
whole,  would  be  the  bureaucracy  he  was  thinking  of.  In  this 
case  too,  Marx  serves  as  a  good  excuse  for  the  Communists, 
whether  the  extravagant  tastes  of  various  strata  of  the  new  class 
or  poor  administration  is  under  criticism. 

Contemporary  Communism  is  not  only  a  party  of  a  certain 
type,  or  a  bureaucracy  which  has  sprung  from  monopolistic 
ownership  and  excessive  state  interference  in  the  economy. 
More  than  anything  else,  the  essential  aspect  of  contemporary 
Communism  is  the  new  class  of  otvners  and  exploiters. 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


59 


6. 

No  class  is  established  by  its  own  action,  even  though  it* 
ascent  is  organized  and  accompanied  by  a  conscious  struggle. 
This  holds  true  for  the  new  class  in  Communism. 

The  new  class,  because  it  had  a  weak  relationship  to  the  econ¬ 
omy  and  social  structure,  and  of  necessity  had  its  origin  in  a 
single  party,  was  forced  to  establish  the  highest  possible  organ¬ 
izational  structure.  Finally  it  was  forced  to  a  deliberate  and 
conscious  withdrawal  from  its  earlier  tenets.  Consequently  the 
new  class  is  more  highly  organized  and  more  highly  class-con¬ 
scious  than  any  class  in  recorded  history. 

This  proposition  is  true  only  if  it  is  taken  relatively;  con¬ 
sciousness  and  organizational  structure  being  taken  in  relation 
to  the  outside  world  and  to  other  classes,  powers,  and  social 
forces.  No  other  class  in  history  has  been  as  cohesive  and  single- 
minded  in  defending  itself  and  in  controlling  that  which  it 
holds— collective  and  monopolistic  ownership  and  totalitarian 
authority. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  new  class  is  also  the  most  deluded 
and  least  conscious  of  itself.  Every  private  capitalist  or  feudal 
lord  was  conscious  of  the  fact  that  he  belonged  to  a  special  dis¬ 
cernible  social  category.  He  usually  believed  that  this  category 
was  destined  to  make  the  human  race  happy,  and  that  without 
this  category  chaos  and  general  ruin  would  ensue.  A  Com¬ 
munist  member  of  the  new  class  also  believes  that,  without  his 
party,  society  would  regress  and  founder.  But  he  is  not  conscious 
of  the  fact  that  he  belongs  to  a  new  ownership  class,  for  he  does 
not  consider  himself  an  owner  and  does  not  take  into  account 
the  special  privileges  he  enjoys.  He  thinks  that  he  belongs  to 
a  group  with  prescribed  ideas,  aims,  attitudes,  and  roles.  That 
is  all  he  sees.  He  cannot  see  that  at  the  same  time  he  belongs 
to  a  special  social  category:  the  ownership  class. 

Collective  ownership,  which  acts  to  reduce  the  class,  at  the 


60 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


same  time  makes  it  unconscious  of  its  class  substance,  and  each 
one  of  the  collective  owners  is  deluded  in  that  he  thinks  he 
uniquely  belongs  to  a  movement  which  would  abolish  classes 
in  society. 

A  comparison  of  other  characteristics  of  the  new  class  with 
those  of  other  ownership  classes  reveals  many  similarities  and 
many  differences.  The  new  class  is  voracious  and  insatiable,  just 
as  the  bourgeoisie  was.  But  it  does  not  have  the  virtues  of 
frugality  and  economy  that  the  bourgeoisie  had.  The  new  class 
is  SIS  exclusive  as  the  aristocracy  but  without  aristocracy’s  refine¬ 
ment  and  proud  chivalry. 

The  new  class  also  has  advantages  over  other  classes.  Because 
it  is  more  compact  it  is  better  prepared  for  greater  sacrifices 
and  heroic  exploits.  The  individual  is  completely  and  totally 
subordinated  to  the  whole;  at  least,  the  prevailing  ideal  calls 
for  such  subordination  even  when  he  is  out  seeking  to  better 
himself.  The  new  clsiss  is  strong  enough  to  carry  out  material 
and  other  ventures  that  no  other  class  was  ever  able  to  do. 
Since  it  possesses  the  nation’s  goods,  the  new  class  is  in  a  posi¬ 
tion  to  devote  itself  religiously  to  the  aims  it  has  set  and  to 
direct  all  the  forces  of  the  people  to  the  furtherance  of  these 
aims. 

The  new  ownership  is  not  the  same  sis  the  political  govern¬ 
ment,  but  is  created  and  aided  by  that  government.  The  use, 
enjoyment,  and  distribution  of  property  is  the  privilege  of  the 
party  and  the  party’s  top  men. 

Party  members  feel  that  authority,  that  control  over  property, 
brings  with  it  the  privileges  of  this  world.  Consequently,  un¬ 
scrupulous  ambition,  duplicity,  toadyism,  and  jealousy  inevita¬ 
bly  must  increase.  Careerism  and  an  ever  expanding  bureauc¬ 
racy  are  the  incurable  diseases  of  Communism.  Because  the 
Communists  have  transformed  themselves  into  owners,  and 
because  the  road  to  power  and  to  material  privileges  is  open 
only  through  “devotion”  to  the  party— to  the  class,  to  “social¬ 
ism”— unscrupulous  ambition  must  become  one  of  the  main 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


61 


ways  of  life  and  one  of  the  main  methods  for  the  development 
of  Communism. 

In  non-Communist  systems,  the  phenomena  of  careerism 
and  unscrupulous  ambition  are  a  sign  that  it  is  profitable  to 
be  a  bureaucrat,  or  that  owners  have  become  parasites,  so  that 
the  administration  of  property  is  left  in  the  hands  of  employees. 
In  Communism,  careerism  and  unscrupulous  ambition  testify 
to  the  fact  that  there  is  an  irresistible  drive  toward  ownership 
and  the  privileges  that  accompany  the  administration  of  ma¬ 
terial  goods  and  men. 

Membership  in  other  ownership  classes  is  not  identical  with 
the  ownership  of  particular  property.  This  is  still  less  the 
case  in  the  Communist  system  inasmuch  as  ownership  is 
collective.  To  be  an  otvner  or  a  joint  owner  in  the  Communist 
system  means  that  one  enters  the  ranks  of  the  ruling  political 
bureaucracy  and  nothing  else. 

In  the  new  class,  just  as  in  other  classes,  some  individuals 
constantly  fall  by  the  wayside  while  others  go  up  the  ladder. 
In  private -ownership  classes  an  individual  left  his  property  to 
his  descendants.  In  the  new  class  no  one  inherits  anything  ex¬ 
cept  the  aspiration  to  raise  himself  to  a  higher  rung  of  the 
ladder.  The  new  class  is  actually  being  created  from  the  lowest 
and  broadest  strata  of  the  people,  and  is  in  constant  motion. 
Although  it  is  sociologically  possible  to  prescribe  who  belongs 
to  the  new  class,  it  is  difficult  to  do  so;  for  the  new  class  melts 
into  and  spills  over  into  the  people,  into  other  lower  classes, 
and  is  constantly  changing. 

The  road  to  the  top  is  theoretically  o[)en  to  all,  just  as  every 
one  of  Napoleon’s  soldiers  carried  a  marshal’s  baton  in  his 
knapsack.  The  only  thing  that  is  required  to  get  on  the  road 
is  sincere  and  complete  loyalty  to  the  party  or  to  the  new  class. 
Open  at  the  bottom,  the  new  class  becomes  increasingly  and 
relentlessly  narrower  at  the  top.  Not  only  is  the  desire  necessary 
for  the  climb;  also  necessary  is  the  ability  to  understand  and 
develop  doctrines,  firmness  in  struggles  against  antagonists,  ex- 


62  THE  NEW  CLASS 

ceptional  dexterity  and  cleverness  in  intra-party  struggles,  and 
talent  in  strengthening  the  class.  Many  present  themselves,  but 
few  are  chosen.  Although  more  open  in  some  respects  than 
other  classes,  the  new  class  is  also  more  exclusive  than  other 
classes.  Since  one  of  the  new  class’s  most  important  features  is 
monopoly  of  authority,  this  exclusiveness  is  strengthened  by 
bureaucratic  hierarchical  prejudices. 

Nowhere,  at  any  time,  has  the  road  been  as  wide  open  to  the 
devoted  and  the  loyal  as  it  is  in  the  Communist  system.  But  the 
ascent  to  the  heights  has  never  at  any  time  been  so  difficult  or 
required  so  much  sacrifice  and  so  many  victims.  On  the  one 
hand.  Communism  is  open  and  kind  to  all;  on  the  other  hand, 
it  is  exclusive  and  intolerant  even  of  its  its  own  adherents. 


7. 


The  fact  that  there  is  a  new  ownership  class  in  Communist 
countries  does  not  explain  everything,  but  it  is  the  most  im¬ 
portant  key  to  understanding  the  changes  which  are  periodi¬ 
cally  taking  place  in  these  countries,  especially  in  the  U.S.S.R. 

It  goes  without  saying  that  every  such  change  in  each  separate 
Communist  country  and  in  the  Communist  system  as  a  whole 
must  be  examined  separately,  in  order  to  determine  the  extent 
and  significance  of  the  change  in  the  specific  circumstances.  To 
do  this,  however,  the  system  should  be  understood  as  a  whole 
to  the  fullest  extent  possible. 

In  connection  with  current  changes  in  the  U.S.S.R.  it  will  be 
profitable  to  point  out  in  passing  what  is  occurring  in  the  kolk¬ 
hozes.  The  establishment  of  kolkhozes  and  the  Soviet  govern¬ 
ment  policy  toward  them  illustrates  clearly  the  exploiting 
fiature  of  the  new  class. 

Stalin  did  not  and  Khrushchev  does  not  consider  kolkhozes 
as  a  “logical  socialistic”  form  of  ownership.  In  practice  this 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


63 


means  that  the  new  class  has  not  succeeded  in  completely  taking 
over  the  management  of  the  villages.  Through  the  kolkhozes 
and  the  use  of  the  compulsory  crop-purchase  system,  the  new 
class  has  succeeded  in  making  vassals  of  the  peasants  and  grab¬ 
bing  a  lion’s  share  of  the  peasants’  income,  but  the  new  class 
has  not  become  the  only  power  of  the  land.  Stalin  was  com¬ 
pletely  aware  of  this.  Before  his  death,  in  Economic  Problems 
of  Socialism  in  the  U.S.S.R.,  Stalin  foresaw  that  the  kolkhozes 
should  become  state  property,  which  is  to  say  that  the  bureau¬ 
cracy  should  become  the  real  owner.  Criticizing  Stalin  for  his 
excess  use  of  purges,  Khrushchev  did  not  however  renounce 
Stalin’s  views  on  property  in  kolkhozes.  The  appointment  by 
the  netv  regime  of  30,000  party  workers,  mostly  to  be  presidents 
of  kolkhozes,  tvas  only  one  of  the  measures  in  line  with  Stalin’s 
policy. 

Just  as  under  Stalin,  the  new  regime,  in  executing  its  so-called 
liberalization  policy,  is  extending  the  “socialist"  ownership  of 
the  new  class.  Decentralization  in  the  economy  does  not  mean 
a  change  in  ownership,  but  only  gives  greater  rights  to  the 
lower  strata  of  the  bureaucracy  or  of  the  new  class.  If  the  so- 
called  liberalization  and  decentralization  meant  anything  else, 
that  would  be  manifest  in  the  political  right  of  at  least  part  of 
the  people  to  exercise  some  influence  in  the  management  of 
material  goods.  At  least,  the  people  would  have  the  right  to 
criticize  the  arbitrariness  of  the  oligarchy.  This  would  lead  to 
the  creation  of  a  new  political  movement,  even  though  it  were 
only  a  loyal  opposition.  However,  this  is  not  even  mentioned, 
just  as  democracy  in  the  party  is  not  mentioned.  Liberalization 
and  decentralization  are  in  force  only  for  Communists;  first  for 
the  oligarchy,  the  leaders  of  the  new  class;  and  second,  for  those 
in  the  lower  echelons.  This  is  the  new  method,  inevitable  under 
changing  conditions,  for  the  further  strengthening  and  consoli¬ 
dation  of  monopolistic  ownership  and  totalitarian  authority  of 
the  netv  class. 

The  fact  that  there  is  a  new  owning,  monopolistic,  and  total- 


64 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


itarian  class  in  Communist  countries  calls  for  the  following 
conclusion:  All  changes  initiated  by  the  Communist  chiefs  are 
dictated  first  of  all  by  the  interests  and  aspirations  of  the  new 
class,  which,  like  every  social  group,  lives  and  reacts,  defends 
itself  and  advances,  with  the  aim  of  increasing  its  power.  This 
does  not  mean,  however,  that  such  changes  may  not  be  impor¬ 
tant  for  the  rest  of  the  people  as  well.  Although  the  innovations 
introduced  by  the  new  class  have  not  yet  materially  altered  the 
Communist  system,  they  must  not  be  underestimated.  It  is 
necessary  to  gain  insight  into  the  substance  of  these  changes  in 
order  to  determine  their  range  and  significance. 

The  Communist  regime,  in  common  with  others,  must  take 
into  account  the  mood  and  movement  of  the  masses.  Be¬ 
cause  of  the  exclusiveness  of  the  Communist  Party  and  the 
absence  of  free  public  opinion  in  its  ranks,  the  regime  cannot 
discern  the  real  status  of  the  masses.  However,  their  dissatis¬ 
faction  does  penetrate  the  consciousness  of  the  top  leaders. 
In  spite  of  its  totalitarian  management,  the  new  class  is  not 
immune  to  every  type  of  opposition. 

Once  in  power,  the  Communists  have  no  difficulty  in  settling 
their  accounts  with  the  bourgeoisie  and  large-estate  owners. 
The  historical  development  is  hostile  to  them  and  their  prop¬ 
erty  and  it  is  easy  to  arouse  the  masses  against  them.  Seizing 
property  from  the  bourgeoisie  and  the  large-estate  owners  is 
quite  easy;  difficulties  arise  when  seizure  of  small  properties  is 
involved.  Having  acquired  power  in  the  course  of  earlier  ex¬ 
propriations,  the  Communists  can  do  even  this.  Relations  are 
rapidly  clarified:  there  are  no  more  old  classes  and  old  owners, 
society  is  “classless,”  or  on  the  road  to  being  so,  and  men  have 
started  to  live  in  a  new  manner. 

Under  such  conditions,  demands  to  return  to  the  old  pre¬ 
revolutionary  relations  seem  unrealistic,  if  not  ridiculous. 
Material  and  social  bases  no  longer  exist  for  the  maintenance 
of  such  relations.  The  Communists  meet  such  demands  as  if 
they  were  jests. 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


65 


The  new  class  is  most  sensitive  to  demands  on  the  part  of  the 
people  for  a  special  kind  of  freedom,  not  for  freedom  in  general 
or  political  freedom.  It  is  especially  sensitive  to  demands  for 
freedom  of  thought  and  criticism,  within  the  limits  of  present 
conditions  and  within  the  limits  of  “socialism”;  not  for  de¬ 
mands  for  a  return  to  previous  social  and  ownership  relations. 
This  sensitivity  originates  from  the  class’s  special  position. 

The  new  class  instinctively  feels  that  national  goods  are,  in 
fact,  its  property,  and  that  even  the  terms  "socialist,”  "social,” 
and  “state”  property  denote  a  general  legal  fiction.  The  new 
class  also  thinks  that  any  breach  of  its  totalitarian  authority 
might  imperil  its  ownership.  Consequently,  the  new  class 
opposes  any  type  of  freedom,  ostensibly  for  the  purpose  of 
preserving  “socialist”  ownership.  Criticism  of  the  new  class’s 
monopolistic  administration  of  property  generates  the  fear  of 
of  a  possible  loss  of  power.  The  new  class  is  sensitive  to  these 
criticisms  and  demands  depending  on  the  extent  to  which  they 
expose  the  manner  in  which  it  rules  and  holds  power. 

This  is  an  important  contradiction.  Property  is  legally  con¬ 
sidered  social  and  national  property.  But,  in  actuality,  a  single 
group  manages  it  in  its  own  interest.  The  discrepancy  between 
legal  and  actual  conditions  continuously  results  in  obscure  and 
abnormal  social  and  economic  relationships.  It  also  means  that 
the  words  of  the  leading  group  do  not  correspond  to  its  actions; 
and  that  all  actions  result  in  strengthening  its  property  hold¬ 
ings  and  its  political  position. 

This  contradiction  cannot  be  resolved  without  jeopardizing 
the  class’s  position.  Other  ruling,  property-owning  classes  could 
not  resolve  this  contradiction  either,  unless  forcefully  deprived 
of  monopoly  of  power  and  ownership.  Wherever  there  has  been 
a  higher  degree  of  freedom  for  society  as  a  whole,  the  ruling 
classes  have  been  forced,  in  one  way  or  another,  to  renounce 
monopoly  of  ownership.  The  reverse  is  true  also:  tvherever 
monopoly  of  ownership  has  been  impossible,  freedom,  to  some 
degree,  has  become  inevitable. 


66 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


In  Communism,  power  and  orvnership  are  almost  always  in 
the  same  hands,  but  this  tact  is  concealed  under  a  legal  guise. 
In  classical  capitalism,  the  worker  had  equality  with  the  cap¬ 
italist  before  the  law,  even  though  the  worker  was  being 
exploited  and  the  capitalist  was  doing  the  exploiting.  In  Com¬ 
munism,  legally,  all  are  equal  with  respect  to  material  goods. 
The  formal  otvner  is  the  nation.  In  reality,  because  of  monopo¬ 
listic  administration,  only  the  narrotvest  stratum  of  administra¬ 
tors  enjoys  the  rights  of  ownership. 

Every  real  demand  for  freedom  in  Communism,  the  kind  of 
demand  that  hits  at  the  substance  of  Communism,  boils  down 
to  a  demand  for  bringing  material  and  property  relations  into 
accord  tvith  what  the  law  provides. 

A  demand  for  freedom— based  on  the  position  that  capital 
goods  produced  by  the  nation  can  be  managed  more  efficiently 
by  society  than  by  private  monopoly  or  a  private  owner,  and 
consequently  should  actually  be  in  the  hands  or  under  control 
of  society  exercised  through  its  freely  elected  representatives— 
would  force  the  new  class  either  to  make  concessions  to  other 
forces,  or  to  take  off  the  mask  and  admit  its  ruling  and  ex¬ 
ploiting  characteristics.  The  type  of  ownership  and  exploita¬ 
tion  which  the  netv  class  creates  by  using  its  authority  and  its 
administrative  privileges  is  such  that  even  the  class  itself  must 
deny  it.  Does  not  the  new  class  emphasize  that  it  uses  its  au¬ 
thority  and  administrative  functions  in  the  name  of  the  nation 
as  a  whole  to  preserve  national  property? 

This  makes  the  legal  position  of  the  new  class  uncertain  and 
is  also  the  source  of  the  new  class’s  biggest  internal  difficulties. 
The  contradiction  discloses  the  disharmony  between  words  and 
actions;  ^V^hile  promising  to  abolish  social  differences,  it  must 
always  increase  them  by  acquiring  the  products  of  the  nation’s 
workshops  and  granting  privileges  to  its  adherents.  It  must 
proclaim  loudly  its  dogma  that  it  is  fulfilling  its  historical  mis¬ 
sion  of  “final”  liberation  of  mankind  from  every  misery  and 
calamity  while  it  acts  in  exactly  the  opposite  way. 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


67 


The  contradiction  between  the  new  class’s  real  ownership 
position  and  its  legal  position  can  furnish  the  basic  reason  for 
criticism.  This  contradiction  has  within  it  the  ability  not  only 
to  incite  others  but  also  to  corrode  the  class’s  own  ranks,  since 
privileges  are  actually  being  enjoyed  by  only  a  few.  This  contra¬ 
diction,  when  intensified,  holds  prospects  of  real  changes  in 
the  Communist  system,  whether  the  ruling  class  is  in  favor  of 
the  change  or  not.  The  fact  that  this  contradiction  is  so  obvious 
has  been  the  reason  for  the  changes  made  by  the  new  class, 
especially  in  so-called  liberalization  and  decentralization. 

Forced  to  withdraw  and  surrender  to  individual  strata,  the 
new  class  aims  at  concealing  this  contradiction  and  strengthen¬ 
ing  its  own  position.  Since  ownership  and  authority  continue 
intact,  all  measures  taken  by  the  new  class— even  those  demo¬ 
cratically  inspired— show  a  tendency  toward  strengthening  the 
management  of  the  political  bureaucracy.  The  system  turns 
democratic  measures  into  positive  methods  for  consolidating 
the  position  of  the  ruling  classes.  Slavery  in  ancient  times  in 
the  East  inevitably  permeated  all  of  society’s  activities  and 
components,  including  the  family.  In  the  same  way,  the  monop¬ 
olism  and  totalitarianism  of  the  ruling  class  in  the  Communist 
system  are  imposed  on  all  the  aspects  of  social  life,  even  though 
the  political  heads  are  not  aiming  at  this. 

Yugoslavia’s  so-called  workers’  management  and  autonomy, 
conceived  at  the  time  of  the  struggle  against  Soviet  imperialism 
as  a  far-reaching  democratic  measure  to  deprive  the  party  of 
the  monopoly  of  administration,  has  been  increasingly  relegated 
to  one  of  the  areas  of  party  work.  Thus,  it  is  hardly  possible  to 
change  the  present  system.  The  aim  of  creating  a  new  demo¬ 
cracy  through  this  type  of  administration  will  not  be  achieved. 
Besides,  freedom  cannot  be  extended  to  the  largest  piece  of  the 
pie.  Workers’  management  has  not  brought  about  a  sharing  in 
profits  by  those  who  produce,  either  on  a  national  level  or  in 
local  enterprises.  This  type  of  administration  has  increasingly 
turned  into  a  safe  type  for  the  regime.  Through  various  taxes 


68 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


and  other  means,  the  regime  has  appropriated  even  the  share 
of  the  profits  which  the  workers  believed  would  be  given  to 
them.  Only  crumbs  from  the  tables  and  illusions  have  been  left 
to  the  workers.  Without  universal  freedom  not  even  workers’ 
management  can  become  free.  Clearly,  in  an  unfree  society 
nobody  can  freely  decide  anything.  The  givers  have  somehow 
obtained  the  most  value  from  the  gift  of  freedom  they  sup¬ 
posedly  handed  the  workers. 

This  does  not  mean  that  the  new  class  cannot  make  conces¬ 
sions  to  the  people,  even  though  it  only  considers  its  own 
interests.  Worken’  management,  or  decentralization,  is  a  con¬ 
cession  to  the  masses.  Circumstances  may  drive  the  new  class, 
no  matter  how  monopolistic  and  totalitarian  it  may  be,  to  re¬ 
treat  before  the  masses.  In  1948,  when  the  conflict  took  place 
between  Yugoslavia  and  the  U.S.S.R.,  the  Yugoslav  leaders 
were  forced  to  execute  some  reforms.  Even  though  it  might 
mean  a  backward  step,  they  set  up  reforms  as  soon  as  they  saw 
themselves  in  jeopardy.  Something  similar  is  happening  today 
in  the  eastern  European  countries. 

In  defending  its  authority,  the  ruling  class  must  execute  re¬ 
forms  every  time  it  becomes  obvious  to  the  people  that  the 
class  is  treating  national  property  as  its  own.  Such  reforms  arc 
not  proclaimed  as  being  what  they  really  are,  but  rather  as  part 
of  the  “further  development  of  socialism”  and  “socialist  democ 
racy.”  The  groundwork  for  reforms  is  laid  when  the  discrep¬ 
ancy  mentioned  above  becomes  public.  From  the  historical 
point  of  view  the  new  class  is  forced  to  fortify  its  authority  and 
ownership  constantly,  even  though  it  is  running  away  from  the 
truth.  It  must  constantly  demonstrate  how  it  is  successfully 
creating  a  society  of  happy  people,  all  of  whom  enjoy  equal 
rights  and  have  been  freed  of  every  type  of  exploitation.  The 
new  class  cannot  avoid  falling  continuously  into  profound  in 
ternal  contradictions;  for  in  spite  of  its  historical  origin  it  i.' 
not  able  to  make  its  ownership  lawful,  and  it  cannot  renounce 
ownership  without  undermining  itself.  Consequently,  it  is 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


69 


forced  to  try  to  justify  its  increasing  authority,  invoking  abstract 
and  unreal  purposes. 

This  is  a  class  whose  power  over  men  is  the  most  complete 
known  to  history.  For  this  reason  it  is  a  class  with  very  limited 
views,  views  which  are  false  and  unsafe.  Closely  ingrown,  and 
in  complete  authority,  the  new  class  must  unrealistically 
evaluate  its  own  role  and  that  of  the  people  around  it. 

Having  achieved  industrialization,  the  new  class  can  now  do 
nothing  more  than  strengthen  its  brute  force  and  pillage  the 
people.  It  ceases  to  create.  Its  spiritual  heritage  is  overtaken  by 
darkness. 

While  the  new  class  accomplished  one  of  its  greatest  successes 
in  the  revolution,  its  method  of  control  is  one  of  the  most 
shameful  pages  in  human  history.  Men  will  marvel  at  the 
grandiose  ventures  it  accomplished,  and  will  be  ashamed  of 
the  means  it  used  to  accomplish  them. 

When  the  new  class  leaves  the  historical  scene— and  this  must 
happen— there  will  be  less  sorrow  over  its  passing  than  there 
was  for  any  other  class  before  it.  Smothering  everything  except 
what  suited  its  ego,  it  has  condemned  itself  to  failure  and 
shameful  ruin. 


The  Party  State 


1. 


The  mechanism  of  Communist  power  is  perhaps  the  simplest 
which  can  be  conceived,  although  it  leads  to  the  most  refined 
tyranny  and  the  most  brutal  exploitation.  The  simplicity  of 
this  mechanism  originates  from  the  fact  that  one  party  alone, 
the  Communist  Party,  is  the  backbone  of  the  entire  political, 
economic,  and  ideological  activity.  The  entire  public  life  is  at 
a  standstill  or  moves  ahead,  falls  behind  or  turns  around  ac¬ 
cording  to  what  happens  in  the  party  forums. 

Under  the  Communist  systems  the  people  realize  quickly 
what  they  are  and  what  they  are  not  permitted  to  do.  Laws  and 
regulations  do  not  have  an  essential  importance  for  them.  The 
actual  and  unwritten  rules  concerning  the  relationship  between 
the  government  and  its  subjects  do.  Regardless  of  laws,  everyone 
knows  that  the  government  is  in  the  hands  of  the  party  com¬ 
mittees  and  the  secret  police.  Nowhere  is  “the  directing  role” 
of  the  party  prescribed,  but  its  authority  is  established  in  all 
organizations  and  sectors.  No  law  provides  that  the  secret  police 
has  the  right  to  control  citizens,  but  the  police  is  all-powerful. 
No  law  prescribes  that  the  judiciary  and  prosecutors  should 
be  controlled  by  the  secret  police  and  the  party  committee,  but 
they  are.  Most  people  know  that  this  is  the  case.  Everyone 


70 


THE  PARTY  STATE 


71 


knows  what  can  and  what  cannot  be  done,  and  what  depends 
on  whom.  People  adjust  to  the  environment  and  to  actual 
conditions,  turning  to  party  forums  or  to  organs  under  the 
party’s  control  in  all  important  matters. 

The  direction  of  social  organizations  and  social  organs  is 
accomplished  simply  by  this  method:  the  Communists  form  a 
unit,  which  turns  to  authorized  political  forums  in  all  matters. 
This  is  theoretical;  actually  it  operates  in  this  way:  In  cases 
where  the  social  organ  or  organization  is  managed  by  a  person 
who  also  has  power  in  the  party,  he  will  not  refer  to  anyone 
regarding  lesser  matters.  Communists  become  familiar  with 
their  system  and  with  the  relationships  created  by  it;  they 
accustom  themselves  to  distinguish  between  the  important  and 
the  unimportant,  and  refer  to  party  forums  only  in  especially 
important  matters.  The  unit  exists  only  potentially,  important 
decisions  being  made  by  the  party;  the  opinion  of  those  who 
have  elected  the  government  or  administration  of  some  organi¬ 
zation  is  totally  unimportant. 

Communist  totalitarianism  and  the  new  class  took  root  when 
the  Communist  Party  was  preparing  for  the  revolution;  their 
method  of  administering  and  maintaining  authority  also  goes 
back  to  that  time.  The  “directing  role”  in  organs  of  government 
and  social  organizations  is  merely  the  former  Communist  unit 
which  has  since  branched  out,  developed,  and  perfected  itself. 
The  second  "directing  role”  of  the  party  in  the  “building  of 
socialism”  is  nothing  but  the  old  theory  regarding  the  avant- 
garde  role  of  the  party  with  respect  to  the  working  class,  with 
the  difference  that  the  theory  then  had  a  different  significance 
for  society  than  it  has  now.  Before  the  Communists  usurped 
power,  this  theory  was  necessary  in  order  to  recruit  revolution¬ 
aries  and  revolutionary  organs;  now  it  justifies  the  totalitarian 
control  of  the  new  class.  One  springs  from  the  other,  but  one 
is  also  different  from  the  other.  The  revolution  and  its  forms 


72  THE  NEW  CLASS 

were  unavoidable  and  were  even  needed  by  that  part  of  society 
which  irresistibly  aspired  to  technical  and  economic  progress. 

The  totalitarian  tyranny  and  control  of  the  new  class,  which 
came  into  being  during  the  revolution,  has  become  the  yoke 
from  under  which  the  blood  and  sweat  of  all  members  of  society 
flow.  Particular  revolutionary  forms  were  transformed  into  re¬ 
actionary  ones.  This  was  also  the  case  with  the  Communist 
units. 

There  are  two  essential  methods  through  which  Communist 
control  of  the  social  machine  is  accomplished.  The  first  is  the 
unit,  the  main  method  in  principle  and  in  theory.  The  second, 
actually  more  practical  one,  restricts  certain  government  posts 
to  party  members.  These  jobs,  which  are  essential  in  any 
government  but  especially  in  a  Communist  one,  include  assign¬ 
ments  with  police,  especially  the  secret  police;  and  the  diplo¬ 
matic  and  officers  corps,  especially  positions  in  the  information 
and  political  services.  In  the  judiciary  only  top  positions  have 
until  now  been  in  the  hands  of  Communists.  The  judiciary, 
subordinated  to  the  party  and  police  establishments,  is  gener¬ 
ally  poorly  paid,  and  is  unattractive  to  Communists.  However, 
the  tendency  now  is  for  judiciary  posts  to  be  considered  as  a 
privilege  open  only  to  party  members,  and  for  members  of  the 
judiciary  to  have  increasing  privileges.  Thus,  control  over  the 
judiciary  could  be  relaxed,  if  not  completely  abolished,  with 
the  assurance  that  it  will  continue  to  rule  according  to  the 
intentions  of  the  party  or  “in  the  spirit  of  socialism.” 

Only  in  a  Communist  state  are  a  number  of  both  specified 
and  unspecified  positions  reserved  for  members  of  the  party. 
The  Communist  government,  although  a  class  structure,  is  a 
party  government;  the  Communist  army  is  a  party  army;  and 
the  state  is  a  party  state.  More  precisely.  Communists  tend  to 
treat  the  army  and  the  state  as  their  exclusive  weapons. 

The  exclusive,  if  untvritten,  law  that  only  party  members 
can  become  policemen,  officers,  diplomats,  and  hold  similar 
positions,  or  that  only  they  can  exercise  actual  authority,  creates 


THE  PARTY  STATE 


73 


a  special  privileged  group  of  bureaucrats  and  simplifies  the 
mechanism  of  government  and  administration.  In  this  manner 
the  party  unit  expanded  and  more  or  less  took  in  all  these  serv¬ 
ices.  As  a  result,  the  unit  has  disappeared  while  these  services 
have  become  an  essential  area  for  party  activity. 

There  is  no  fundamental  difference  in  the  Communist  system 
between  governmental  services  and  party  organizations,  as  in 
the  example  of  the  party  and  the  secret  police.  The  party  and 
the  police  mingle  very  closely  in  their  daily  functioning;  the 
difference  between  them  is  only  in  the  distribution  of  work. 

The  entire  governmental  structure  is  organized  in  this 
manner.  Political  positions  are  reserved  exclusively  for  party 
members.  Even  in  non-political  governmental  bodies  Com¬ 
munists  hold  the  strategic  positions  or  oversee  administration. 
Calling  a  meeting  at  the  party  center  or  publishing  an  article 
is  sufficient  to  cause  the  entire  state  and  social  mechanism  to 
begin  functioning.  If  difficulties  occur  anywhere,  the  party  and 
the  police  very  quickly  correct  the  “error.” 


2. 


The  particular  character  of  the  Communist  Party  has  already 
been  discussed.  There  are  other  special  features,  too,  which 
help  reveal  the  essence  of  a  Communist  state. 

The  Communist  Party  does  not  have  its  unique  character 
solely  because  it  is  revolutionary  and  centralized  and  observes 
military  discipline  and  other  definite  goals,  or  has  other  charac¬ 
teristics.  There  are  other  parties  with  similar  features,  even 
though  these  features  may  be  stronger  in  the  Communist  Party. 

However,  only  in  the  Communist  Party  is  "ideological  unity” 
or  an  identical  concept  of  the  world  and  of  the  development  of 
society  obligatory  for  its  members.  This  applies  only  to  persons 
who  function  in  the  higher  forums  of  the  party.  The  others, 
those  in  lower  positions,  are  obligated  only  to  give  lip  service 


74  THE  NEW  CLASS. 

to  identical  ideological  views,  while  they  execute  orders  handed 
down  from  above.  The  tendency,  however,  is  to  have  those  in 
lower  positions  adjust  their  ideological  level  to  that  of  the 
leaders. 

Lenin  did  not  consider  that  party  members  were  all  obliged 
to  hold  the  same  views.  However,  in  practice,  he  refuted  and 
explained  away  every  view  which  did  not  appear  ’’Marxist” 
or  “the  party’s”;  that  is,  every  view  that  did  not  strengthen 
the  party  in  the  manner  which  he  had  originally  conceived. 
His  settling  of  accounts  with  various  opposition  groups  in  the 
party  was  different  from  Stalin’s,  because  Lenin  did  not  kill 
his  subjects,  “merely”  quelled  them.  While  he  was  in  power 
both  freedom  of  expression  and  voting  privileges  were  in  effect. 
Total  authority  over  everything  had  not  yet  been  established. 

Stalin  required  ideological  unity— obligatory  philosophic  and 
other  views— in  addition  to  political  unity  as  a  meeting  ground 
for  all  party  members.  This  is  actually  Stalin’s  contribution 
to  Lenin’s  teaching  about  the  party.  Stalin  formed  the  concept 
of  obligatory  ideological  unity  in  his  early  youth:  in  his  time, 
unanimity  became  the  unwritten  requirement  of  all  Com¬ 
munist  parties,  and  it  remains  so  to  the  present  day. 

Yugoslav  leaders  held  and  still  hold  the  same  views.  They 
are  still  under  Soviet  “collective  leadership”  and  the  forums 
of  other  Communist  parties.  This  insistence  on  the  obligatory 
ideolog^ical  unity  of  the  party  is  a  sign  that  no  essential  changes 
have  occurred,  and  only  confirms  the  fact  that  free  discussion 
is  not  possible,  or  possible  only  in  a  very  limited  way,  under 
today’s  “collective  leadership.” 

^Vhat  does  obligatory  unity  in  the  party  mean  and  where 
does  it  lead? 

Its  political  consequences  are  very  serious.  The  power  in 
every  party,  especially  in  the  Communist  Party,  resides  in  its 
leaders  and  higher  forums.  Ideological  unity  as  an  obligation, 
especially  in  the  centralized  and  militarily  disciplined  Com¬ 
munist  Party,  inevitably  brings  with  it  the  power  of  the  central 


THE  PARTY  STATE 


75 


body  leadership  over  the  thoughts  of  its  members.  Although 
ideological  unity  was  attained  in  Lenin’s  time  through  dis¬ 
cussion  held  at  the  top,  Stalin  himself  began  to  regulate  it. 
Today,  post-Stalin  “collective  leadership”  is  satisfied  to  make 
it  impossible  for  new  social  ideas  to  appear.  Thus,  Marxism 
has  become  a  theory  to  be  defined  exclusively  by  party  leaders. 
There  is  no  other  type  of  Marxism  or  Communism  today,  and 
the  development  of  another  type  is  hardly  possible. 

The  social  consequences  of  ideological  unity  have  been 
tragic:  Lenin’s  dictatorship  was  strict,  but  Stalin’s  dictatorship 
became  totalitarian.  The  abolition  of  all  ideological  struggle 
in  the  party  meant  the  termination  of  all  freedom  in  society, 
since  only  through  the  party  did  the  various  strata  find  expres¬ 
sion.  Intolerance  of  other  ideas  and  insistence  on  the  presum¬ 
ably  exclusive  scientific  nature  of  Marxism  were  the  beginning 
of  ideological  monopoly  by  party  leadership,  which  later  de¬ 
veloped  into  complete  monopoly  over  society. 

Party  ideological  unity  makes  independent  movements  im¬ 
possible  within  the  Communist  system  and  within  society  itself. 
Every  action  depends  on  the  party,  which  has  total  control 
over  society;  within  it  there  is  not  the  slightest  freedom. 

Ideological  unity  did  not  arise  suddenly  but,  like  everything 
in  Communism,  developed  gradually,  reaching  its  greatest 
height  during  the  struggle  for  power  between  various  party 
factions.  It  is  not  at  all  accidental  that,  during  Stalin’s  ascend¬ 
ancy  to  power  in  the  mid-1920’s,  it  was  openly  demanded  of 
Trotsky  for  the  first  time  that  he  reject  all  ideas  other  than 
those  formulated  by  the  party. 

Party  ideological  unity  is  the  spiritual  basis  of  personal  dic¬ 
tatorship.  Without  it  personal  dictatorship  cannot  even  be 
imagined.  It  begets  and  strengthens  the  dictatorship,  and  vice 
versa.  This  is  understandable;  a  monopoly  over  ideas,  or  ob¬ 
ligatory  ideological  unity,  is  only  a  complement  and  a  theo¬ 
retical  mask  for  personal  dictatorship.  Although  personal 
dictatorship  and  ideological  unity  were  already  evident  in  the 


76  THE  NEW  CLASS 

beginnings  of  contemporary  Communism  or  Bolshevism,  both 
are  firmly  establishing  themselves  with  Communism’s  full 
power,  so  that  they,  as  trends  and  often  as  prevailing  forms,  will 
never  again  be  abandoned  until  the  fall  of  Communism. 

The  suppression  of  ideological  differences  among  the  leaders 
has  also  abolished  fractions  and  currents,  and  thus  has  abolished 
all  democracy  in  Communist  parties.  Thus  began  the  period  of 
the  fiifirer-principle  in  Communism:  ideologists  are  merely 
people  with  power  in  the  party  regardless  of  inadequate  intel¬ 
lectual  ability. 

The  continuance  of  ideological  unity  in  the  party  is  an  un¬ 
mistakable  sign  of  the  maintenance  of  a  personal  dictatorship, 
or  the  dictatorship  of  a  small  number  of  oligarchs  who  tempo¬ 
rarily  work  together  or  maintain  a  balance  of  power,  as  is 
the  case  in  the  U.S.S.R.  today.  We  find  a  tendency  toward 
ideological  unity  in  other  parties  also,  especially  in  socialist 
parties  in  their  earlier  stages.  However,  this  is  only  a  tendency 
in  these  parties;  in  Communist  parties  it  has  become  obligatory. 
One  is  obliged  not  only  to  be  a  Marxist,  but  to  adopt  the  type 
of  Marxism  desired  and  prescribed  by  the  leadership.  Marxism 
has  been  transformed  from  a  free  revolutionary  ideology  into 
a  prescribed  dogma.  As  in  ancient  Eastern  despotism,  the  top 
authority  interprets  and  prescribes  the  dogma,  while  the  em¬ 
peror  is  the  archpriest. 

The  obligatory  ideological  unity  of  the  party,  which  has 
passed  through  various  phases  and  forms,  has  remained  the 
most  essential  characteristic  of  Bolshevik  or  Communist  parties. 

If  these  parties  had  not  at  the  same  time  been  the  beginning 
of  new  classes,  and  if  they  had  not  had  a  special  historical  role 
to  play,  obligatory  ideological  unity  could  not  have  existed  in 
them.  Except  for  the  Communist  bureaucracy,  not  a  single 
class  or  party  in  modem  history  has  attained  complete  ideo¬ 
logical  unity.  None  had,  before,  the  task  of  transforming  all  of 
society,  mostly  through  political  and  administrative  means.  For 
such  a  task,  a  complete,  fanatical  confidence  in  the  righteous- 


THE  PARTY  STATE 


77 


ness  and  nobility  of  their  views  is  necessary.  Such  a  task  calls 
for  exceptional  brutal  measures  against  other  ideologies  and 
social  groups.  It  also  calls  for  ideological  monopoly  over 
society  and  for  absolute  unity  of  the  ruling  class.  Communist 
parties  have  needed  special  ideological  solidarity  for  this  reason. 

Once  ideological  unity  is  established,  it  operates  as  powerfully 
as  prejudice.  Communists  are  educated  in  the  idea  that  ideo¬ 
logical  unity,  or  the  prescription  of  ideas  from  above,  is  the 
holy  of  holies,  and  that  factionalism  in  the  party  is  the  greatest 
of  all  crimes. 

Complete  control  of  society  could  not  be  accomplished  with¬ 
out  coming  to  terms  with  other  socialist  groups.  Ideological 
unity,  too,  is  only  possible  through  a  reconciliation  within  the 
party’s  own  ranks.  Both  the  one  and  the  other  occur  approxi¬ 
mately  simultaneously;  in  the  minds  of  the  adherents  of 
totalitarianism  they  appear  as  “objectively”  identical,  although 
the  first  is  a  reconciliation  of  the  new  class  with  its  opponents, 
and  the  second  is  a  reconciliation  within  the  ruling  class.  In 
fact,  Stalin  knew  that  Trotsky,  Bukharin,  Zinoviev,  and  others 
were  not  foreign  spies  and  traitors  to  the  “socialist  fatherland.” 
However,  since  their  disagreement  with  him  obviously  delayed 
the  establishment  of  totalitarian  control,  he  had  to  destroy 
them.  His  crimes  within  the  party  consist  of  the  fact  that  he 
transformed  “objective  unfriendliness”— the  ideological  and 
political  differences  in  the  party— into  the  subjective  guilt  of 
groups  and  individuals,  attributing  to  them  crimes  which  they 
did  not  commit. 


3. 


But  this  is  the  inescapable  road  of  every  Communist  system. 
The  method  of  establishing  totalitarian  control,  or  Ideological 
unity,  may  be  less  severe  than  Stalin’s,  but  the  essence  is  always 
the  same.  Even  where  industrialization  is  not  the  form  or  con- 


78  THE  NEW  CLASS, 

dition  for  establishing  totalitarian  control,  as  in  Czechoslovakia 
and  Hungary,  the  Communist  bureaucracy  is  inevitably  com¬ 
pelled  to  establish  the  same  forms  of  authority  in  underdevel¬ 
oped  countries  as  those  established  in  the  Soviet  Union.  This 
does  not  occur  simply  because  the  Soviet  Union  imposed  such 
forms  on  these  countries  as  subordinates,  but  because  it  is 
within  the  very  nature  of  Communist  parties  themselves  and 
of  their  ideologies  to  do  so.  Party  control  over  society,  identifi¬ 
cation  of  the  government  and  governmental  machinery  with 
the  party,  and  the  right  to  express  ideas  dependent  on  the 
amount  of  power  and  the  position  one  holds  in  the  hierarchy; 
these  are  the  essential  and  inevitable  characteristics  of  every 
Communist  bureaucracy  as  soon  as  it  attains  power. 

The  party  is  the  main  force  of  the  Communist  state  and 
government.  It  is  the  motive  force  of  everything.  It  unites  with¬ 
in  itself  the  new  class,  the  government,  ownership,  and  ideas. 

For  this  reason,  military  dictatorships  have  not  been  possible 
under  Communism,  although  it  seems  that  military  conspiracies 
have  occurred  in  the  U.S.S.R.  Military  dictatorships  would  not 
be  able  to  encompass  all  phases  of  life,  nor  even  convince  the 
nation  temporarily  of  the  need  for  exceptional  efforts  and  self- 
sacrifice.  Such  can  be  accomplished  only  by  the  party,  and  then 
only  by  a  party  with  belief  in  such  vast  ideals  that  its  despotism 
appears  to  its  members  and  adherents  as  necessary,  as  the 
highest  form  of  state  and  social  organization. 

Viewed  from  the  standpoint  of  freedom,  a  military  dictator¬ 
ship  in  a  Communist  system  would  denote  great  progress.  It 
would  signify  the  termination  of  totalitarian  party  control,  or 
of  a  party  oligarchy.  Theoretically  speaking,  however,  a  military 
dictatorship  would  be  possible  only  in  case  of  a  military  defeat 
or  an  exceptional  political  crisis.  Even  in  such  a  case  it  would 
initially  be  a  form  of  party  dictatorship  or  it  would  have  to 
conceal  itself  in  the  party.  But,  this  would  inevitably  lead  to 
a  change  in  the  entire  system. 

The  totalitarian  dictatorship  of  the  Communist  Party  oli- 


THE  PARTY  STATE 


79 


garchy  in  the  Communist  system  is  not  the  result  of  momentary 
political  relations,  but  of  a  long  and  complex  social  progress. 
A  change  in  it  would  not  mean  a  change  in  the  form  of  govern¬ 
ment  in  one  and  the  same  system,  but  a  change  in  the  system 
itself,  or  the  beginning  of  a  change.  Such  a  dictatorship  is 
itself  the  system,  its  body  and  soul,  its  essence. 

The  Communist  government  very  rapidly  becomes  a  small 
circle  of  party  leaders.  The  claim  that  it  is  a  dictatorship  ol 
the  proletariat  becomes  an  empty  slogan.  The  process  that 
leads  to  this  develops  with  the  inevitability  and  uncontrol 
lability  of  the  elements,  and  the  theory  that  the  party  is  an 
avant-garde  of  the  proletariat  only  aids  the  process. 

This  does  not  mean  that  during  the  battle  for  power  the 
party  is  not  the  leader  of  the  working  masses  or  that  it  is  not 
working  in  their  interests.  But  then,  the  party’s  role  and 
struggles  are  stages  and  forms  of  its  movement  toward  power. 
Although  its  struggle  aids  the  working  class,  it  also  strengthens 
the  party,  as  well  as  the  future  power-holders  and  the  embryonic 
new  class.  As  soon  as  it  attains  power,  the  party  controls  all 
power  and  takes  all  goods  into  its  hands,  professing  to  be  the 
representative  of  the  interests  of  the  working  class  and  the 
working  people.  Except  for  short  periods  during  the  revolu¬ 
tionary  battle,  the  proletariat  does  not  participate  or  play  a 
greater  role  in  this  than  any  other  class. 

This  does  not  mean  that  the  proletariat,  or  some  of  its  strata, 
are  not  temporarily  interested  in  keeping  the  party  in  power. 
The  peasants  supported  those  who  professed  the  intention  to 
rescue  them  from  hopeless  misery  through  industrialization. 

AV'hile  individual  strata  of  the  working  classes  may  tempo¬ 
rarily  support  the  party,  the  government  is  not  theirs  nor  is 
their  part  in  the  government  important  for  the  course  of  social 
progress  and  social  relations.  In  the  Communist  system  nothing 
is  done  to  aid  the  working  people,  particularly  the  working 
class,  to  attain  power  and  rights.  It  cannot  be  otherwise. 

The  classes  and  masses  do  not  exercise  authority,  but  the 


80  THE  NEW  CL.<SS 

party  does  so  in  their  name.  In  every  party,  including  the  most 
democratic,  leaders  play  an  important  role  to  the  extent  that 
the  party’s  authority  becomes  the  authority  of  the  leaders.  The 
so-called  “dictatorship  of  the  proletariat,”  which  is  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  and  under  the  best  circumstances  becomes  the  authority 
of  the  party,  inevitably  evolves  into  the  dictatorship  of  the 
leaders.  In  a  totalitarian  government  of  this  type,  the  dictator¬ 
ship  of  the  proletariat  is  a  theoretical  justification,  or  ideo¬ 
logical  mask  at  best,  for  the  authority  of  some  oligarchs. 

Marx  envisioned  the  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat  as  democ¬ 
racy  within  and  for  the  benefit  of  the  proletariat:  that  is,  a 
government  in  which  there  are  many  socialist  streams  or  parties. 
The  only  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat,  the  Paris  Commune  of 
1871,  on  which  Marx  based  his  conclusions,  was  composed  of 
several  parties,  among  which  the  Marxist  party  was  neither  the 
smallest  nor  the  most  significant.  But  a  dictatorship  of  the  pro¬ 
letariat  which  would  be  directly  operated  by  the  proletariat  is  a 
pure  Utopia,  since  no  government  can  operate  without  political 
organizations.  Lenin  delegated  the  dictatorship  of  the  prole¬ 
tariat  to  the  authority  of  one  party,  his  own.  Stalin  delegated 
the  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat  to  his  own  personal  authority 
—to  his  personal  dictatorship  in  the  party  and  in  the  state.  Since 
the  death  of  the  Communist  emperor,  his  descendants  have 
been  fortunate  in  that  through  “collective  leadership”  they 
could  distribute  authority  among  themselves.  In  any  case,  the 
Communist  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat  is  either  a  Utopian 
ideal  or  a  function  reserved  for  an  elite  group  of  party  leaders. 

Lenin  thought  that  the  Russian  soviets,  Marx’s  “ultimate 
discovery,”  were  the  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat.  In  the  be¬ 
ginning,  because  of  their  revolutionary  initiative  and  because 
of  the  participation  of  the  masses,  the  soviets  did  seem  to  be 
something  of  this  kind.  Trotsky  also  believed  that  the  soviets 
were  a  contemporary  political  form  just  as  parliaments,  bom 
in  the  struggle  against  absolute  monarchs,  have  been.  However, 
these  were  illusions.  The  soviets  were  transformed  from  revo- 


THE  PARTY  STATE 


81 


lutionary  bodies  into  a  form  suitable  for  the  totalitarian 
dictatorship  of  the  new  class,  or  the  party. 

This  was  also  the  case  with  Lenin’s  democratic  centralism, 
including  both  that  of  the  party  and  of  the  government.  As 
long  as  public  differences  are  tolerated  in  the  party,  one  can 
still  speak  of  centralism— even  though  it  is  not  a  very  democratic 
form  of  centralism.  When  totalitarian  authority  is  created, 
centralism  disappears  and  the  naked  despotism  of  the  oligarchy 
takes  over. 

We  may  conclude  from  this  that  there  is  a  constant  tendency 
to  transform  an  oligarchic  dictatorship  into  a  personal  dictator¬ 
ship.  Ideological  unity,  the  inevitable  struggle  at  the  top  of 
the  party,  and  the  needs  of  the  system  as  a  whole  tend  toward 
personal  dictatorship.  The  leader  who  succeeds  in  getting  to 
the  top,  along  with  his  assistants,  is  the  one  who  succeeds  in 
most  logically  expressing  and  protecting  the  interests  of  the 
new  class  at  any  given  time. 

There  is  a  strong  trend  toward  personal  dictatorship  in  other 
historical  situations:  for  instance,  all  forces  must  be  subor¬ 
dinated  to  one  idea  and  one  will  when  industrialization  is  being 
pressed  or  when  a  nation  is  at  war.  But  there  is  a  specific  and 
pure  Communist  reason  for  personal  dictatorship:  authority  is 
the  basic  aim  and  means  of  Communism  and  of  every  true  Com¬ 
munist.  The  thirst  for  power  is  insatiable  and  irresistible  among 
Communists.  Victory  in  the  struggle  for  power  is  equal  to  being 
raised  to  a  divinity;  failure  means  the  deepest  mortification 
and  disgrace. 

The  Communist  leaders  must  also  tend  to  personal  extrava¬ 
gance-something  which  they  cannot  resist  because  of  human 
frailty  and  because  of  the  inherent  need  of  those  in  power  to 
be  recognizable  prototypes  of  brilliance  and  might. 

Careerism,  extravagance,  and  love  of  power  are  inevitable, 
and  so  is  corruption.  It  is  not  a  matter  of  the  corruption  of 
public  servants,  for  this  may  occur  less  frequently  than  in  the 
state  which  preceded  it.  It  is  a  special  type  of  corruption  caused 


82  THE  NEW  CLASS 

by  the  fact  that  the  government  is  in  the  hands  of  a  single 
political  group  and  is  the  source  of  all  privileges.  "Care  of 
its  men”  and  their  placement  in  lucrative  positions,  or  the 
distribution  of  all  kinds  of  privileges,  becomes  unavoidable. 
The  fact  that  the  government  and  the  party  are  identical  with 
the  state,  and  practically  with  the  holding  of  all  property, 
causes  the  Communist  state  to  be  one  which  corrupts  itself, 
in  that  it  inevitably  creates  privileges  and  parasitic  functions. 

A  member  of  the  Yugoslav  Communist  Party  very  pictur¬ 
esquely  described  the  atmosphere  in  which  a  regular  Com¬ 
munist  lives:  “I  am  really  tom  into  three  parts:  I  see  those 
who  have  a  better  automobile  than  I  have,  yet  it  seems  to  me 
that  they  are  not  more  devoted  to  the  party  and  to  socialism 
than  I  am;  I  look  down  from  the  heights  on  those  who  have 
no  automobile,  for  they  haven’t  really  earned  any.  So  I’m  lucky 
that  I  have  the  one  I  have.” 

Obviously,  he  was  not  a  true  Communist,  but  was  one  of 
those  who  became  a  Communist  because  he  was  an  idealist, 
and  then  being  disillusioned,  tried  to  be  satisfied  with  what 
might  come  to  him  in  a  normal  bureaucratic  career.  The  true 
Communist  is  a  mixture  of  a  fanatic  and  an  unrestrained 
power-holder.  Only  this  type  makes  a  true  Communist.  The 
others  are  idealists  or  careerists. 

Since  it  is  based  on  administration,  the  Communist  system 
is  unavoidably  bureaucratic  with  a  strict  hierarchical  organi¬ 
zation.  In  the  Communist  system,  exclusive  groups  are  estab¬ 
lished  around  political  leaders  and  forums.  All  policy-making 
is  reduced  to  wrangling  in  these  exclusive  groups,  in  which 
familiarity  and  cliquishness  flower.  The  highest  group  is  gener¬ 
ally  the  most  intimate.  At  intimate  suppers,  on  hunts,  in 
conversations  between  two  or  three  men,  matters  of  state  of 
the  most  vital  importance  are  decided.  Meetings  of  party  for¬ 
ums,  conferences  of  the  government  and  assemblies,  serve  no 
purpose  but  to  make  declarations  and  put  in  an  appearance. 


THE  PARTY  STATE 


83 


They  are  only  convened  to  confirm  what  has  previously  been 
cooked  up  in  intimate  kitchens. 

The  Communists  have  a  fetishist  relation  toward  the  state 
or  the  government,  exactly  as  if  it  were  their  own  property. 
The  same  men,  the  same  groups,  which  are  intimate  and  fa¬ 
miliar  inside  the  party  become  stiff,  formal,  and  pompous  indi¬ 
viduals  when  they  act  as  representatives  of  the  state. 

This  monarchy  is  anything  but  enlightened.  The  monarch 
himself,  the  dictator,  does  not  feel  himself  to  be  either  a 
monarch  or  a  dictator.  When  he  was  called  dictator,  Stalin 
ridiculed  the  idea.  He  felt  that  he  was  the  representative  of 
the  collective  party  will.  He  was  right  to  a  degree— since  prob¬ 
ably  no  one  else  in  history  ever  had  as  much  personal  power. 
He,  like  every  other  Communist  dictator,  was  aware  that  a 
retreat  from  the  ideological  bases  of  the  party,  from  the  mo¬ 
nopolism  of  the  new  class,  from  ownership  of  the  nation’s  goods, 
or  from  the  totalitarian  power  of  the  oligarchy,  would  result 
in  his  inevitable  downfall.  Indeed,  no  such  retreat  was  even 
considered  by  Stalin,  as  he  was  the  foremost  representative 
and  creator  of  the  system.  However,  even  he  was  dependent 
on  the  system  created  under  his  administration,  or  on  the 
opinions  of  the  party  oligarchy.  He  could  do  nothing  against 
them  nor  could  he  pass  over  them. 

The  fact  emerges  that  in  the  Communist  system  no  one  is 
independent,  neither  those  at  the  top  nor  the  leader  himself. 
They  are  all  dependent  on  one  another  and  must  avoid  being 
separated  from  their  surroundings,  prevailing  ideas,  controls, 
and  interests. 

Is  there,  then,  any  sense  in  talking  about  the  dictatorship 
of  the  proletariat  under  Communism? 

4. 

The  Communist  theory  of  the  state,  a  theory  worked  out 
in  detail  by  Lenin  and  supplemented  by  Stalin  and  others. 


84 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


favors  the  totalitarian  dictatorship  of  the  party  bureaucracy. 
Two  elements  are  fundamental  in  the  theory:  the  theory  of  the 
state  alone  and  the  theory  of  the  withering  away  of  the  state. 
Both  of  these  elements  are  mutually  related  and  together  rej>- 
resent  the  entire  theory.  Lenin’s  theory  of  the  state  is  most 
completely  presented  in  his  document  The  State  and  Revolu¬ 
tion,  which  was  written  while  he  was  hiding  from  the  Provi¬ 
sional  Government  on  the  eve  of  the  October  Revolution.  Like 
everything  else  of  Lenin’s,  the  theory  leans  toward  the  revolu¬ 
tionary  aspects  of  Mamst  teaching.  In  his  discussion  of  the 
state  Lenin  developed  this  aspect  further  and  carried  it  to 
extremes,  utilizing  particularly  the  experience  of  the  Russian 
revolution  of  1905.  Considered  historically,  Lenin’s  document 
was  of  much  greater  significance  as  an  ideological  weapon  of 
the  revolution  than  it  was  as  a  base  for  development  of  a  new 
authority  built  according  to  its  ideas. 

Lenin  reduced  the  state  to  force,  or  more  precisely,  to  the 
organ  of  tyranny  which  one  class  employs  for  the  sake  of  op¬ 
pressing  the  other  classes.  Trying  to  formulate  the  nature  of 
the  state  in  the  most  forceful  way,  Lenin  noted,  “The  state  is 
a  club.” 

Lenin  perceived  other  functions  of  the  state  too.  But  in  these 
functions  he  also  uncovered  what  was  for  him  the  most  indis¬ 
pensable  role  of  the  state— the  use  of  brute  force  by  one  class 
against  the  others. 

Lenin’s  theory  calling  for  the  destruction  of  the  old  state  ap¬ 
paratus  was,  in  fact,  far  from  being  a  scientific  one.  This  docu¬ 
ment  of  Lenin’s— extremely  significant  from  the  historic  point 
of  view— would  make  valid  all  that  is  typical  of  all  Communist 
theories.  In  proceeding  from  immediate  needs,  the  parties 
create  generalities,  ostensibly  scientific  conclusions  and  theories, 
and  proclaim  half-truths  as  truths.  The  fact  that  force  and 
violence  are  basic  characteristics  of  every  state  authority,  or 
the  fact  that  individual  social  and  political  forces  employ  the 
machinery  of  state,  particularly  in  armed  clashes,  cannot  be 


85 


THE  PARTY  STATE 

denied.  However,  experience  shows  that  state  machinery  is 
necessary  to  society,  or  the  nation,  for  still  another  reason— 
for  the  development  and  uniting  of  its  various  functions.  Com¬ 
munist  theory,  as  well  as  that  of  Lenin,  ignores  this  aspect. 

There  were,  long  ago,  communities  without  states  and  au¬ 
thorities.  They  were  not  social  communities,  but  something 
in  transition  between  the  semi-animal  and  human  forms  of 
social  life.  Even  these  most  primitive  communities  had  some 
forms  of  authority.  With  increasingly  complex  forms  of  social 
life,  it  would  be  naive  to  try  to  prove  that  the  need  for  the 
state  would  disappear  in  the  future.  Lenin,  in  support  of  Marx 
who  agreed  with  the  anarchists  about  this,  contemplated  and 
tried  to  establish  precisely  such  a  stateless  society.  Without 
entering  into  a  discussion  on  the  extent  to  which  his  prem¬ 
ises  were  justified,  we  must  remember  that  he  contemplated 
this  society  as  his  classless  society.  According  to  this  theory 
there  will  be  no  classes  and  no  class  struggles;  there  will 
be  no  one  to  oppress  and  to  exploit  others;  and  there  will 
be  no  need  for  the  state.  Until  that  time,  then,  the  “most 
democratic”  state  is  the  “dictatorship  of  the  proletariat,”  for 
the  reason  that  it  “abolishes”  classes,  and  by  so  doing,  ostensibly 
makes  itself  gradually  unnecessary.  Therefore,  everything  that 
strengthens  that  dictatorship,  or  leads  to  the  “abolishing”  of 
classes,  is  justified,  progressive,  and  liberal.  In  those  places 
where  they  are  not  in  control  the  Communists  are  pleaders  in 
behalf  of  the  most  democratic  measures  because  this  facilitates 
their  struggles;  in  those  places  where  they  manage  to  get  con¬ 
trol,  they  become  opponents  of  every  democratic  form  as 
allegedly  a  “bourgeois”  form.  They  currently  proclaim  the 
preposterous  classification  of  democracy  into  “bourgeois”  and 
“socialist,”  although  the  only  proper  and  fair  distinction  must 
be  drawn  solely  on  the  basis  of  the  quantity  of  freedom,  or  the 
universality  of  freedom. 

In  the  entire  Leninist  or  Communist  theory  of  the  state, 
there  are  gaps  in  the  scientific  as  well  as  the  practical  points 


86  THE  NEW  CLASS 

of  view.  Experience  has  demonstrated  that  the  results  are  com¬ 
pletely  contrary  to  those  envisaged  by  Lenin.  The  classes  did 
not  disappear  under  the  “dictatorship  of  the  proletariat,”  and 
the  “dictatorship  of  the  proletariat”  did  not  begin  to  wither 
away.  Actually,  the  creation  of  the  total  authority  of  the  Com¬ 
munists,  and  the  liquidation  of  the  classes  of  the  old  society, 
was  meant  to  look  like  the  liquidation  of  classses  in  general. 
But  the  growth  of  state  power  or,  more  precisely,  of  the  bureau¬ 
cracy  through  which  it  enforced  its  tyranny  did  not  stop  with 
the  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat.  Instead  it  increased.  The 
theory  had  to  be  patched  up  somehow;  Stalin  had  conceived 
a  still  higher  “educational”  role  of  the  Soviet  state  before  it 
“withered.”  If  Communist  theory  of  the  state,  and  especially 
its  practice,  is  reduced  to  its  very  essence,  i.e.,  to  force  and  co¬ 
ercion  as  the  principal  or  only  function  of  the  state,  Stalin’s 
theory  might  be  said  to  be  that  the  police  system  has  this  high 
or  “educational”  role  to  play.  Understandably,  only  a  malicious 
interpretation  could  lead  to  such  a  conclusion.  And  in  this 
theory  of  Stalin’s  there  is  one  of  the  Communist  half-truths: 
Stalin  did  not  know  how  to  explain  the  obvious  fact  that  the 
power  and  might  of  the  state  machinery  continually  grew  in 
the  already  “established  socialist  society.”  So  he  took  one  of 
the  functions  of  the  state— the  educational  function— as  the 
main  function.  He  was  not  able  to  use  tyranny  since  there  no 
longer  were  any  opposition  classes. 

The  situation  is  the  same  with  the  Yugoslav  leaders’  theories 
concerning  “autonomy.”  In  the  clash  with  Stalin,  they  had  to 
“rectify”  his  “deviations”  and  do  something  so  that  the  state 
would  soon  begin  to  “wither  away.”  It  did  not  matter  to  Stalin 
or  to  them  that  they  were  further  promoting  and  strengthening 
that  function  of  the  state— force— which  for  them  was  the  most 
important  function  and  one  on  which  they  based  their  theory 
of  the  state. 

Stalin’s  ideas  on  how  the  state  withers  away  while  growing 
stronger,  i.e.,  the  way  that  the  state’s  functions  continually  ex- 


THE  PARTY  STATE 


87 


pand  and  draw  an  ever  increasing  number  of  citizens  into 
themselves,  is  extremely  interesting.  Perceiving  the  ever  greater 
and  expanding  role  of  the  state  machine,  despite  the  already 
“started”  transition  into  a  “completely  classless”  Communist 
society,  Stalin  thought  that  the  state  would  disappear  by  having 
all  the  citizenry  rise  to  the  state’s  level  and  take  charge  of  its 
affairs.  Lenin,  moreover,  talked  about  the  time  when  “even 
housewives  will  admininster  the  government.”  Theories  resem¬ 
bling  that  of  Stalin  circulate  in  Yugoslavia,  as  we  have  seen. 
Neither  these  nor  Stalin’s  are  able  to  bridge  the  ever  increasing 
chasm  between  the  Communist  theories  of  the  state,  with  the 
“disappearance”  of  classes  and  the  “withering  away”  of  the 
state  in  their  “socialism”  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  realities 
of  the  totalitarian  authority  of  the  party  bureaucracy  on  the 
other. 


5. 


The  most  important  problem  for  Communism,  in  theory 
and  practice,  is  the  question  of  the  state;  the  question  is  a  con¬ 
stant  source  of  difficulties  since  it  is  such  an  obvious  contra¬ 
diction  inside  Communism. 

Communist  regimes  are  a  form  of  latent  civil  war  between 
the  government  and  the  people.  The  state  is  not  merely  an 
instrument  of  tyranny:  society  as  well  as  the  executive  bodies 
of  the  state  machine  is  in  a  continuous  and  lively  oppxDsition 
to  the  oligarchy,  which  aspires  to  reduce  this  opposition  by 
naked  force.  In  practice,  the  Communists  are  unable  to  attain 
the  goal  of  a  state  existing  solely  on  naked  force,  nor  are  they 
able  to  subordinate  society  completely.  But  they  are  able  to 
control  the  organs  of  force,  that  is,  the  f)olice  and  party,  which 
in  turn  control  the  entire  state  machine  and  its  functions.  The 
opposition  of  the  organs  and  functions  of  the  state  against  the 
"irrationalities”  of  the  party  and  f)olice,  or  of  individual  polit- 


88 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


ical  functionaries,  is  really  the  opposition  of  society  carried  over 
into  the  state  machine.  It  is  an  expression  of  dissatisfaction 
because  of  the  oppression  and  crippling  of  society’s  objective 
aspirations  and  needs. 

In  Communist  systems,  the  state  and  state  functions  are  not 
reduced  to  organs  of  oppression,  nor  are  they  identical  with 
them.  As  an  organization  of  national  and  social  life,  the  state 
is  subordinated  to  these  organs  of  oppression.  Communism  is 
unable  to  solve  this  incongruity,  for  the  reason  that  by  its  own 
totalitarian  despotism  it  inevitably  comes  in  conflict  with  dis¬ 
similar  and  opposite  tendencies  of  society,  tendencies  which 
are  expressed  even  through  the  social  functions  of  the  state. 

Because  of  this  contradiction,  and  the  unavoidable  and  con¬ 
stant  need  of  the  Communists  to  treat  the  state  predominantly 
as  an  instrument  of  force,  the  Communist  state  cannot  become 
a  lawful  state,  or  a  state  in  which  the  judiciary  would  be  inde¬ 
pendent  of  the  government  and  in  which  laws  could  actually 
be  enforced.  The  tvhole  Communist  system  is  opposed  to  such 
a  state.  Even  if  the  Communist  leaders  wished  to  create  a  law¬ 
ful  state,  they  could  not  do  so  without  imperiling  their  totali¬ 
tarian  authority. 

An  independent  judiciary  and  the  rule  of  law  tvould  inevita¬ 
bly  make  it  possible  for  an  opposition  to  appear.  For  instance, 
no  law'  in  the  Communist  system  opposes  the  free  expression  of 
opinion  or  the  right  of  organization.  Laws  in  the  Communist 
system  guarantee  all  sorts  of  rights  to  citizens,  and  are  based 
on  the  principle  of  an  independent  judiciary.  In  practice,  there 
is  no  such  thing. 

Freedoms  are  formally  recognized  in  Communist  regimes, 
but  one  decisive  condition  is  a  prerequisite  for  exercising  them: 
freedoms  must  be  utilized  only  in  the  interest  of  the  system 
of  “socialism,”  which  the  Communist  leaders  represent,  or  to 
buttress  their  rule.  This  practice,  contrary  as  it  is  to  legal 
regulations,  inevitably  had  to  result  in  the  use  of  exceptionally 
severe  and  unscrupulous  methods  by  police  and  party  bodies. 


THE  PARTY  STATE 


89 


Legal  forms  must  be  protected  on  the  one  hand  while  the 
monopoly  of  authority  must  be  insured  at  the  same  time. 

For  the  most  part,  in  the  Communist  system,  legislative 
authority  cannot  be  separated  from  executive  authority.  Lenin 
considered  this  a  perfect  solution.  Yugoslav  leaders  also  main¬ 
tain  this.  In  a  one-party  system,  this  is  one  of  the  sources  of 
despotism  and  omnipotence  in  government. 

In  the  same  way,  it  has  been  impossible  in  practice  to  separate 
police  authority  from  judicial  authority.  Those  who  arrest  also 
judge  and  enforce  punishments.  The  circle  is  closed:  the  ex¬ 
ecutive,  the  legislative,  the  investigating,  the  court,  and  the 
punishing  bodies  are  one  and  the  same. 

Why  does  the  Communist  dictatorship  have  to  use  laws  to 
the  great  extent  that  it  does?  Why  does  it  have  to  hide  behind 
legality? 

Foreign  political  propaganda  is  one  of  the  reasons.  An¬ 
other  important  one  is  the  fact  that  the  Communist  regime 
must  insure  and  fix  the  rights  of  those  upon  whom  it  depends— 
the  new  class— to  maintain  itself.  Laws  are  always  written  from 
the  standpoint  of  the  new  class’s  or  party’s  needs  or  interests. 
Officially  the  laws  must  be  written  for  all  citizens,  but  citizens 
enjoy  the  rights  of  these  laws  conditionally,  only  if  they  are 
not  “enemies  of  socialism.”  Consequently  the  Communists  are 
constantly  concerned  that  they  might  be  forced  to  carry  out 
the  laws  that  they  have  adopted.  Therefore,  they  always  leavei 
a  loophole  or  exception  which  will  enable  them  to  evade  their 
laws. 

For  instance,  the  Yugoslav  legislative  authorities  stand  on  the 
principle  that  no  one  can  be  convicted  except  for  an  act  which 
has  been  exactly  formulated  by  the  law.  However,  most  of  the 
political  trials  are  held  on  the  grounds  of  so-called  "hostile 
propaganda,”  although  this  concept  is  purposely  not  defined 
but,  instead,  left  up  to  the  judges  or  secret  police. 

For  these  reasons  political  trials  in  Communist  regimes  are 
mostly  prearranged.  The  courts  have  the  task  of  demonstrating 


90 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


what  the  power-wielders  need  to  have  demonstrated;  or  have 
the  task  of  giving  a  legal  cloak  to  the  political  judgment  on 
the  “hostile  activity”  of  the  accused. 

In  trials  conducted  by  this  method  the  confession  of  the 
accused  is  most  important.  He  himself  must  acknowledge  that 
he  is  an  enemy.  Thus,  the  thesis  is  confirmed.  Evidence,  little 
as  there  may  be  of  it,  must  be  replaced  by  confession  of  guilt. 

The  political  trials  in  Yugoslavia  are  only  jtocket  editions 
of  the  Moscow  trials.  The  so-called  Moscow  trials  are  the  most 
grotesque  and  bloody  examples  of  judicial  and  legal  comedies 
in  the  Communist  system.  The  majority  of  other  trials  are 
similar  insofar  as  acts  and  punishments  are  concerned. 

How  are  political  trials  handled? 

First,  upon  the  suggestion  of  party  functionaries,  the  party 
police  establish  that  someone  is  an  “enemy”  of  existing  condi¬ 
tions;  that,  if  nothing  else,  his  views  and  discussions  with  close 
friends  represent  trouble,  at  least  for  the  local  authorities.  The 
next  step  is  the  preparation  of  the  legal  removal  of  the  enemy. 
This  is  done  either  through  a  provocateur,  who  provokes  the 
victim  to  make  “embarrassing  statements,”  to  take  part  in  illegal 
organizing,  or  to  commit  similar  acts;  or  it  is  done  through  a 
“stool  pigeon”  who  simply  bears  witness  against  the  victim 
according  to  the  wishes  of  the  police.  Most  of  the  illegal  organi¬ 
zations  in  Communist  regimes  are  created  by  the  secret  police 
in  order  to  lure  opponents  into  them  and  to  put  these  oppo¬ 
nents  in  a  position  where  the  police  can  settle  accounts  with 
them.  The  Communist  government  does  not  discourage  “ob¬ 
jectionable”  citizens  from  committing  law  violations  and 
crimes;  in  fact  it  prods  them  into  such  violations  and  crimes. 

Stalin  generally  operated  without  the  courts,  using  torture 
extensively.  However,  even  if  torture  is  not  used  and  the  courts 
are  used  instead,  the  essence  is  the  same:  Communists  settle 
accounts  with  their  opponents  not  because  they  have  committed 
crimes,  but  because  they  are  opponents.  It  can  be  said  that 
most  political  criminals  who  are  punished  are  innocent  from 


THE  PARTY  STATE 


91 


a  legal  point  of  view,  even  though  they  are  opponents  of  the 
regime.  From  the  Communist  point  of  view,  these  opponents 
are  punished  by  “due  process  of  law,”  although  there  may  be 
no  legal  basis  for  their  being  convicted. 

When  citizens  spontaneously  turn  against  the  regime’s  meas¬ 
ures,  the  Communist  authorities  handle  them  without  regard 
to  constitutional  and  legal  regulations.  Modern  history  has  no 
record  of  actions  against  the  opposition  of  the  masses  which 
are  as  brutal,  inhuman,  and  unlawful  as  those  of  Communist 
regimes.  The  action  taken  in  Poznan  is  the  best  known,  but  not 
the  most  brutal.  Occupying  and  colonial  powers  seldom  take 
such  severe  measures,  even  though  they  are  conquerors  and 
accomplish  their  actions  by  the  use  of  extraordinary  laws  and 
measures.  The  Communist  power-wielders  accomplish  them  in 
their  very  "own”  country  by  trampling  on  their  own  laws. 

Even  in  non-political  matters,  the  judiciary  and  the  legis¬ 
lative  authorities  are  not  safe  from  the  despots.  The  totali¬ 
tarian  class  and  its  members  cannot  help  but  mix  into  the  affairs 
of  the  judiciary  and  the  legislative  authorities.  This  is  an 
everyday  occurrence. 

An  article  in  the  March  23,  1955,  issue  of  the  Belgrade  news¬ 
paper  Politika  (Politics)  offers  this  suitable  illustration  of  the 
real  role  and  position  of  the  courts  in  Yugoslavia  (although 
there  has  always  been  a  higher  degree  of  legality  in  Yugoslavia 
than  in  other  Communist  countries): 

In  a  discussion  of  problems  connected  with  criminals  oper¬ 
ating  in  the  economy,  at  a  2-day  annual  conference,  presided 
over  by  public  prosecutor  Brana  Jevremovic,  the  public  prose¬ 
cutors  of  the  republics,  of  the  Vojvodina,  and  of  Belgrade 
announced  that  cooperation  between  the  judiciary  organs  and 
the  autonomous  organs  in  the  economy  and  all  political  or¬ 
ganizations  is  necessary  for  complete  success  in  the  battle 
against  criminals  operating  in  the  economy  and  all  political 
organizations. . . . 

The  public  prosecutors  think  that  society  has  not  yet  reacted 


92 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


with  sufficient  vigor  with  regard  to  ridding  itself  of  such  crim¬ 
inals.  .  .  . 

The  prosecutors  agreed  that  society’s  reaction  must  be  more 
effective.  According  to  the  thinking  of  the  prosecutors,  more 
severe  penalties  and  more  severe  methods  of  executing  penal¬ 
ties  are  only  some  of  the  measures  that  should  be  taken.  .  .  . 

The  examples  cited  in  the  discussions  confirm  the  opinions 
that  some  hostile  elements  which  have  lost  the  battle  on  the 
political  field  have  now  entered  the  economic  field.  Conse¬ 
quently,  the  problem  of  the  criminal  in  the  economy  is  not 
only  a  legal  problem,  but  also  a  political  one,  which  requires 
the  cooperation  of  all  government  agencies  and  social  organi¬ 
zations.  .  .  . 

Summing  up  the  discussion,  federal  public  prosecutor  Brana 
Jevremovic  emphasized  the  significance  of  legality  in  con¬ 
ditions  resulting  from  the  decentralization  that  has  taken  place 
in  Yugoslavia,  and  pointed  out  the  justification  for  the  severity 
with  which  our  highest  leaders  have  sentenced  individuals 
guilty  of  criminal  action  against  the  economy. 


It  is  obvious  that  prosecutors  decide  that  the  courts  shall 
judge  and  that  penalties  shall  be  imposed  according  to  the 
intent  of  the  “highest  leaders.”  What  then  is  left  of  the  courts 
and  of  legality? 

In  the  Communist  system  legal  tlieories  change  according 
to  circumstances  and  the  needs  of  the  oligarchy.  Vishinsky’s 
principle  which  calls  for  a  sentence  to  be  based  on  “maximum 
reliability,”  that  is,  on  political  analysis  and  need,  has  been 
abandoned.  Even  if  more  humane  or  more  scientific  prin¬ 
ciples  are  adopted,  the  substance  will  not  change  until  the 
relationship  between  the  government  and  the  judiciary  and  the 
law  itself  is  changed.  Periodic  campaigns  for  “legality,”  and 
Khrushchev’s  bragging  that  the  party  has  “now”  succeeded  in 
putting  the  police  and  the  judiciary  under  control,  only  reveal 
changes  in  the  form  of  increased  needs  of  the  ruling  class  for 
legal  security.  They  do  not  show  changes  in  the  ruling  class’s 
position  toward  society,  the  state,  the  courts,  or  the  laws. 


THE  PARTY  STATE 


93 


6. 

The  Communist  legal  system  cannot  free  itself  of  formalism, 
nor  abolish  the  decisive  influence  of  party  units  and  the  police 
in  trials,  elections,  and  similar  events.  The  higher  up  one  goes, 
the  more  legality  becomes  a  mere  ornament,  and  the  greater 
the  role  of  government  in  the  judiciary,  in  elections,  and  the 
like  becomes. 

The  emptiness  and  pomposity  of  Communist  elections  is 
generally  well  known:  if  I  remember  correctly,  Attlee  wittily 
called  them  “a  race  with  one  horse.”  It  seems  to  me  that  some¬ 
thing  should  be  said:  Why  is  it  that  Communists  cannot  do 
without  elections,  even  though  they  have  no  effect  on  political 
relations:  and  cannot  do  without  such  a  costly  and  empty  under¬ 
taking  as  a  parliamentary  establishment? 

Again,  propaganda  and  foreign  policy  are  among  the  reasons. 
There  is  also  this:  no  government,  not  even  a  Communist  one, 
can  exist  without  everything  being  legally  constituted.  Under 
contemporary  conditions  this  is  done  by  means  of  elected  repre¬ 
sentatives.  The  people  must  formally  confirm  everything  the 
Communists  do. 

Besides  this  there  is  a  deeper  and  more  important  reason 
for  the  parliamentary  system  in  Communist  states.  It  is  neces¬ 
sary  that  the  top  party  bureaucracy,  or  the  political  core  of  the 
new  class,  approve  the  measures  taken  by  the  government,  its 
supreme  body.  A  Communist  government  can  ignore  general 
public  opinion,  but  every  Communist  government  is  bound  by 
the  public  opinion  of  the  party,  and  by  Communist  public 
opinion.  Consequently,  even  though  elections  have  scarcely  any 
meaning  for  Communists,  the  selection  of  those  who  will  be  in 
the  parliament  is  done  very  carefully  by  the  top  party  group.  In 
the  selection,  account  is  taken  of  all  circumstances,  such  as  serv¬ 
ices,  role  and  function  in  the  movement  and  in  society,  the  pro¬ 
fessions  represented,  etc.  From  the  intra-party  point  of  view, 
elections  for  leadership  are  very  important:  the  leaders  dis- 


94  THE  NEW  CLASS 

tribute  those  party  powers  in  the  parliament  which  they  think 
are  most  important.  Thus  the  leadership  has  the  legality  it 
needs  to  operate  in  the  name  of  the  party,  class,  and  people. 

Attempts  to  allow  two  or  more  Communists  to  contend  for 
the  same  seat  in  parliament  have  had  no  constructive  results. 
There  were  several  instances  where  this  was  attempted  in  Yugo¬ 
slavia,  but  the  leadership  decided  that  such  attempts  were  “dis¬ 
rupting.”  News  has  recently  been  received  of  a  large  number 
of  Communist  candidates  competing  for  the  same  positions  in 
the  eastern  European  countries.  The  intention  may  be  to  have 
two  or  more  candidates  for  every  office,  but  there  is  little  possi¬ 
bility  that  this  will  be  done  systematically.  It  would  be  a  step 
forward,  and  might  even  be  the  beginning  of  a  turning  toward 
democracy  by  the  Communist  system.  However,  it  seems  to  me 
that  there  is  still  a  long  way  to  go  before  such  measures  will 
be  realized  and  that  development  in  eastern  Europe  will  first 
turn  in  the  direction  of  the  Yugoslav  system  of  “workers’  man¬ 
agement,”  instead  of  becoming  a  political  democracy  with  its 
attendant  changes.  The  despotic  core  still  holds  everything  in 
its  hands,  conscious  of  the  fact  that  relinquishment  of  its  tra¬ 
ditional  party  unity  would  prove  very  dangerous.  Every  free¬ 
dom  within  the  party  imperils  not  only  the  authority  of  the 
leaders,  but  totalitarianism  itself. 

Communist  parliaments  are  not  in  a  position  to  make  de¬ 
cisions  on  anything  important.  Selected  in  advance  as  they  are, 
flattered  that  they  have  been  thus  selected,  representatives  do 
not  have  the  power  or  the  courage  to  debate  even  if  they  wanted 
to  do  so.  Besides,  since  their  mandate  does  not  depend  on  the 
voters,  representatives  do  not  feel  that  they  are  answerable  to 
them.  Communist  parliaments  are  justifiably  called  “mauso¬ 
leums”  for  the  representatives  who  compose  them.  Their  right 
and  role  consist  of  unanimously  approving  from  time  to  time 
that  which  has  already  been  decided  for  them  from  the  wings. 
Another  type  of  parliament  is  not  required  for  this  system  of 


THE  PARTY  STATE 


95 


government;  indeed,  the  reproach  could  be  made  that  any  other 
type  would  be  superfluous  and  too  costly. 


7. 


Founded  by  force  and  violence,  in  constant  conflict  with 
its  people,  the  Communist  state,  even  if  there  are  no  external 
reasons,  must  be  militaristic.  The  cult  of  force,  especially  mili¬ 
tary  force,  is  nowhere  so  prevalent  as  in  Communist  countries. 
Militarism  is  the  internal  basic  need  of  the  new  class;  it  is  one 
of  the  forces  which  make  possible  the  new  class’s  existence, 
strength,  and  privileges. 

Under  constant  pressure  to  be  primarily  and,  when  necessary, 
exclusively  an  organ  of  violence,  the  Communist  state  has  been 
a  bureaucratic  state  since  the  beginning.  Maintained  by  the 
despotism  of  a  handful  of  power-wielders,  the  Communist  state 
wields  more  power  than  any  other  state  organization  does  with 
the  aid  of  diverse  laws  and  regulations.  Soon  after  its  establish¬ 
ment,  the  Communist  state  becomes  replete  with  so  many  regu¬ 
lations  that  even  judges  and  lawyers  have  difficulty  in  finding 
their  way  through  them.  Everything  has  to  be  accurately 
regulated  and  confirmed,  even  though  little  profit  is  derived 
thereby.  For  ideological  reasons  Communist  legislators  often 
issue  various  laws  without  taking  the  real  situation  and  practical 
jjossibilities  into  consideration.  Immersed  in  legal  and  abstract 
“socialist”  formulas,  not  subject  to  criticism  or  opposition,  they 
compress  life  into  paragraphs,  which  the  assemblies  mechani¬ 
cally  ratify. 

The  Communist  government  is  non-bureaucratic,  however, 
where  a  question  of  the  needs  of  the  oligarchy  and  the  working 
methods  of  its  leaders  is  involved.  Even  in  exceptional  cases 
state  and  party  heads  do  not  like  to  fetter  themselves  with  regu¬ 
lations.  Policy-making  and  the  right  of  political  determination 


96  THE  NEW  CLASS 

are  in  their  hands,  and  these  cannot  bear  procrastination  or  too 
strict  formalization.  In  decisions  concerning  the  economy  as  a 
whole  and  in  all  other  matters  except  unimportant,  representa¬ 
tional,  and  formal  questions,  the  heads  function  without 
excessive  restrictions.  The  creators  of  the  most  rigid  type  of 
bureaucratism  and  political  centralism  are  not  as  individuals 
bureaucrats  nor  are  they  bound  by  legal  regulations.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  Stalin  was  not  a  bureaucrat  in  any  respect.  Disorder  and 
delay  prevail  in  the  offices  and  establishments  of  many  Com¬ 
munist  leaders. 

This  does  not  prevent  them  from  temporarily  taking  a  stand 
‘‘against  bureaucratism,”  that  is,  against  both  unscrupulousness 
and  slowness  in  administration.  They  are  today  battling  against 
the  Stalinist  form  of  bureaucratic  administration.  However, 
they  have  no  intention  of  eliminating  the  real,  fundamental 
bureaucratism  rampant  in  the  management  of  the  political 
apparatus  inside  the  economy  and  state. 

In  this  ‘‘battle  against  bureaucratism,”  Communist  leaders 
usually  refer  to  Lenin.  However,  a  very  careful  study  of  Lenin 
reveals  that  he  did  not  foresee  that  the  new  system  was  moving 
toward  political  bureaucracy.  In  the  conflict  with  the  bureauc¬ 
racy  inherited  partly  from  the  Czar’s  administration,  Lenin 
attributed  most  of  the  difficulties  to  the  fact  that  “there  are 
no  apparatuses  composed  from  a  list  of  Communists  or  from 
a  list  of  members  of  Soviet  party  schools.”  The  old  officials  dis¬ 
appeared  under  Stalin,  and  Communists  from  the  “list”  stepped 
into  their  places,  and  in  spite  of  this,  bureaucratism  grew. 
Even  in  places  like  Yugoslavia  where  there  was  a  considerable 
weakening  of  bureaucratic  administration,  its  essence,  the 
monopoly  of  political  bureaucracy  and  the  relations  resulting 
from  it,  was  not  abolished.  Even  when  it  is  abolished  as  an 
adminstrative  method  of  management,  bureaucratism  continues 
to  exist  as  a  political-social  relation. 

The  Communist  state,  or  government,  is  working  toward  the 
complete  impersonalization  of  the  individual,  the  nation,  and 


THE  PARTY  STATE 


97 


even  of  its  own  representatives.  It  aspires  to  turn  the  entire 
state  into  a  state  of  functionaries.  It  aspires  to  regulate  and 
control,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  wages,  housing  conditions, 
and  even  intellectual  activities.  The  Communists  do  not  dis¬ 
tinguish  people  as  to  whether  or  not  they  are  functionaries— all 
persons  are  considered  to  be  functionaries— but  by  the  amount 
of  pay  they  receive  and  the  number  of  privileges  they  enjoy. 
By  means  of  collectivization,  even  the  peasant  gradually  be¬ 
comes  a  member  of  the  general  bureaucratic  society. 

However,  this  is  the  external  view.  In  the  Communist  system 
social  groups  are  sharply  divided.  In  spite  of  such  differences 
and  conflicts,  though,  the  Communist  society  is  as  a  whole 
more  unified  than  any  other.  The  weakness  of  the  whole  lies 
in  its  compulsory  attitudes  and  relationships  and  the  conflicting 
elements  of  its  composition.  However,  every  part  is  dependent 
on  every  other  part,  just  as  in  a  single,  huge  mechanism. 

In  a  Communist  government,  or  state,  just  as  in  an  absolute 
monarchy,  the  development  of  human  personality  is  an  abstract 
ideal.  In  the  period  of  the  absolute  monarchy,  when  mercan¬ 
tilists  imposed  the  state  upon  the  economy,  the  crown  itself— 
for  example,  Catherine  the  Great— thought  that  the  government 
was  obliged  to  re-educate  the  people.  The  Communist  leaders 
operate  and  think  in  the  same  way.  However,  during  the  time 
of  the  absolute  monarchy,  the  government  did  this  in  an  at¬ 
tempt  to  subordinate  existing  ideas  to  its  own.  Today,  in 
the  Communist  system,  the  government  is  simultaneously  the 
owner  and  the  ideologist.  This  does  not  mean  that  the  human 
personality  has  disappeared  or  that  it  has  been  changed  into 
a  dull,  impersonal  cog  which  rotates  in  a  large,  merciless  state 
mechanism,  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  an  omnipotent 
sorcerer.  Personality,  by  its  own  nature  both  collective  and 
individual,  is  indestructible,  even  under  the  Communist  system. 
Of  course  it  is  stifled  under  this  system  more  than  under  other 
systems,  and  its  individuality  has  to  be  manifested  in  a  different 
way. 


98 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


Its  world  is  a  world  of  petty  daily  cares.  When  these  cares  and 
wishes  collide  with  the  fortress  of  the  system,  which  holds  a 
monopoly  over  the  material  and  intellectual  life  of  the  people, 
even  this  petty  world  is  not  free  or  secure.  In  the  Communist 
system,  insecurity  is  the  way  of  life  for  the  individual.  The 
state  gives  him  the  opportunity  to  make  a  living,  but  on  com 
dition  that  he  submit.  The  personality  is  tom  between  what  it 
desires  and  what  it  can  actually  have.  It  is  free  to  recognize  the 
interests  of  the  collective  and  to  submit  to  them,  just  as  in 
every  other  system;  but  also  it  may  rebel  against  the  usurping 
representatives  of  the  collective.  Most  of  the  individuals  in 
the  Communist  system  are  not  opposed  to  socialism,  but  op>- 
posed  to  the  way  in  which  it  is  being  achieved— this  confirms 
the  fact  that  the  Communists  are  not  developing  any  sort  of 
true  socialism.  The  individual  rebels  against  those  limitations 
which  are  in  the  interest  of  the  oligarchy,  not  against  those 
which  are  in  the  interest  of  society. 

Anyone  who  does  not  live  under  these  systems  has  a  hard 
time  grasping  how  human  beings,  particularly  such  proud  and 
brave  peoples,  could  have  given  up  their  freedom  of  thought 
and  work  to  such  an  extent.  The  most  accurate,  though  not  the 
most  complete,  explanation  for  this  situation  is  the  severity 
and  totality  of  tyranny.  But  at  the  root  of  this  situation,  there 
are  deeper  reasons. 

One  reason  is  historical;  the  people  were  forced  to  undergo 
the  loss  of  freedom  in  the  irresistible  drive  toward  economic 
change.  Another  reason  is  of  an  intellectual  and  moral  nature. 
Since  industrialization  had  become  a  matter  of  life  or  death, 
socialism,  or  Communism,  as  its  ideal  expression,  became  the 
ideal  and  hope,  almost  to  the  point  of  religious  obsession 
among  some  of  the  population  at  large  as  well  as  the  Com¬ 
munists.  In  the  minds  of  those  who  did  not  belong  to  the  old 
social  classes,  a  deliberate  and  organized  revolt  against  the  par¬ 
ty,  or  against  the  government,  would  have  been  tantamount  to 
treason  against  the  homeland  and  the  highest  ideals. 


THE  PARTY  STATE 


99 


The  most  important  reason  why  there  was  no  organized 
resistance  to  Communism  lies  deep  in  the  all-inclusiveness  and 
totalitarianism  of  the  Communist  state.  It  had  penetrated  into 
all  the  pores  of  society  and  of  the  personality— into  the  vision 
of  the  scientists,  the  inspiration  of  poets,  and  the  dreams  of 
lovers.  To  rise  against  it  meant  not  only  to  die  the  death  of 
a  desperate  individual,  but  to  be  branded  and  excommunicated 
from  society.  There  is  no  air  or  light  under  the  Communist 
government’s  iron  fist. 

Neither  of  the  two  main  types  of  opposition  groups— that 
stemming  from  the  older  classes  and  that  stemming  from  origi¬ 
nal  Communism  itself— found  ways  and  means  of  combating 
this  encroachment  on  their  liberty.  The  first  group  was  tugging 
backward,  while  the  second  group  carried  on  a  pointless  and 
thoughtless  revolutionary  activity,  and  engaged  in  quibbling 
about  dogma  with  the  regime.  Conditions  were  not  yet  ripe 
for  the  finding  of  new  roads. 

Meanwhile,  the  people  were  instinctively  suspicious  of  the 
new  road  and  resisted  every  step  and  small  detail.  Today,  this 
resistance  is  the  greatest,  the  most  real  threat  to  Communist 
regimes.  The  Communist  oligarchs  no  longer  know  what 
the  masses  think  or  feel.  The  regimes  feel  insecure  in  a  sea  of 
deep  and  dark  discontent. 

Though  history  has  no  record  of  any  other  system  so  sucess- 
ful  in  checking  its  opposition  as  the  Communist  dictatorship, 
none  ever  has  provoked  such  profound  and  far-reaching  dis¬ 
content.  It  seems  that  the  more  the  conscience  is  crushed  and 
the  less  the  opportunities  for  establishing  an  organization  exist, 
the  greater  the  discontent. 

Communist  totalitarianism  leads  to  total  discontent,  in  which 
all  differences  of  opinion  are  gradually  lost,  except  despair 
and  hatred.  Spontaneous  resistance— the  dissatisfaction  of  mil¬ 
lions  with  the  everyday  details  of  life— is  the  form  of  resistance 
that  the  Communists  have  not  been  able  to  smother.  This  was 
confirmed  during  the  Soviet-German  war.  When  the  Germans 


100 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


first  attacked  the  U.S.S.R.,  there  seemed  to  be  little  desire  for 
resistance  among  the  Russians.  However,  Hitler  soon  revealed 
that  his  intentions  were  the  destruction  of  the  Russian  state 
and  the  changing  of  the  Slavs  and  other  Soviet  peoples  into 
impersonal  slaves  of  the  Herrenvolk.  From  the  depths  of  the 
people  there  emerged  the  traditional,  unquenchable  love  for 
the  homeland.  During  the  entire  war  Stalin  did  not  mention 
either  the  Soviet  government  or  its  socialism  to  the  people; 
he  mentioned  only  one  thing— the  homeland.  And  it  was  worth 
dying  for,  in  spite  of  Stalin’s  socialism. 


8. 


The  Communist  regimes  have  succeeded  in  solving  many 
problems  that  had  baflled  the  systems  they  replaced.  They  are 
also  succeeding  in  solving  the  nationality  problem  as  it  existed 
up  to  the  time  they  came  to  power.  They  have  not  been  able 
to  resolve  the  conflict  of  national  bourgeoisie  completely,  how¬ 
ever.  The  problem  has  reappeared  in  the  Communist  regimes 
in  a  new  and  more  serious  form. 

National  rule  is  being  established  in  the  U.S.S.R.  through 
a  highly  developed  bureaucracy.  In  Yugoslavia,  however,  dis¬ 
putes  are  arising  because  of  friction  between  national  bu¬ 
reaucracies.  Neither  the  first  nor  the  second  case  concerns 
national  disputes  in  the  old  sense.  The  Communists  are  not 
nationalists;  for  them,  the  insistence  on  nationalism  is  only 
a  form,  just  like  any  other  form,  through  which  they  strengthen 
their  powers.  For  this  purpose  they  may  even  act  like  vehement 
chauvinists  from  time  to  time.  Stalin  was  a  Georgian,  but  in 
practice  and  in  propaganda,  whenever  necessary,  he  was  a  rabid 
Great  Russian.  Among  Stalin’s  errors,  even  Khrushchev  ad¬ 
mitted,  was  the  terrible  truth  of  the  extermination  of  entire 
peoples.  Stalin  and  Company  used  the  national  prejudices  of 
the  largest  nation— the  Russian  nation— just  as  if  it  had  been 


THE  PARTY  STATE 


101 


composed  of  Hottentots.  The  Communist  leaders  will  always 
take  recourse  to  anything  they  find  useful,  such  as  the  preaching 
of  equality  of  rights  among  the  national  bureaucracies,  which 
is  practically  the  same  to  them  as  the  demand  for  equality  of 
rights  among  nationalities. 

National  feelings  and  national  interest,  however,  do  not  lie 
at  the  basis  of  the  conflict  between  the  Communist  national 
bureaucracies.  The  motive  is  quite  different:  it  is  supremacy  in 
one’s  own  zone,  in  the  sphere  which  is  under  one’s  administra¬ 
tion.  The  struggle  over  the  reputation  and  powers  of  one’s  own 
republic  does  not  go  much  further  than  a  desire  to  strengthen 
one’s  own  power.  The  national  Communist  state  units  have 
no  significance  other  than  that  they  are  administrative  divi¬ 
sions,  on  the  basis  of  language.  The  Communist  bureaucrats 
are  vehement  local  patriots  on  behalf  of  their  own  admin¬ 
istrative  units,  even  though  they  have  not  been  trained  for 
the  part  on  either  a  linguistic  or  a  national  basis.  In  some 
purely  administrative  units  in  Yugoslavia  (the  regional  coun¬ 
cils),  chauvinism  has  been  greater  than  in  the  national  republic 
governments. 

Among  the  Communists  one  can  encounter  both  shortsighted 
bureaucratic  chauvinism  and  a  decline  of  national  conscious¬ 
ness,  even  in  the  very  same  people,  depending  upon  oppor¬ 
tunities  and  requirements. 

The  languages  which  the  Communists  speak  are  hardly  the 
same  as  those  of  their  own  people.  The  words  are  the  same,  but 
the  expressions,  the  meaning,  the  inner  sense— all  of  these  are 
their  very  own. 

While  they  are  autarchical  with  regard  to  other  systems  and 
localistic  within  their  own  system,  the  Communists  can  be 
fervent  internationalists  when  it  is  to  their  interest  to  be  so. 
The  various  nations,  each  of  which  once  had  its  own  form  and 
color,  its  own  history  and  hopes,  stand  virtually  still  now, 
gray  and  languid,  beneath  the  all-powerful,  all-knowing,  and 
essentially  non-national  oligarchies.  The  Communists  did  not 


102 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


succeed  in  exciting  or  awakening  the  nations:  in  this  sense  they 
also  failed  to  solve  nationality  questions.  Who  knows  anything 
nowadays  about  Ukrainian  writers  and  political  figures?  What 
has  happened  to  that  nation,  which  is  the  same  size  as  France, 
and  was  once  the  most  advanced  nation  in  Russia?  You  would 
think  that  only  an  amorphous  and  formless  mass  of  people 
could  remain  under  this  impersonal  machine  of  oppression. 

However,  this  is  not  the  case. 

Just  as  personality,  various  social  classes,  and  ideas  still  live, 
so  do  the  nations  still  live;  they  function;  they  struggle  against 
despotism;  and  they  preserve  their  distinctive  features  un¬ 
destroyed.  If  their  consciences  and  souls  are  smothered,  they 
are  not  broken.  Though  they  are  under  subjugation,  they 
have  not  yielded.  The  force  activating  them  today  is  more  than 
the  old  or  bourgeois  nationalism;  it  is  an  imperishable  desire 
to  be  their  own  masters,  and,  by  their  own  free  develop¬ 
ment,  to  attain  an  increasingly  fuller  fellowship  with  the  rest  of 
the  human  race  in  its  eternal  existence. 


Dogmatism  in  the  Economy 


1. 


The  development  of  the  economy  in  Communism  is  not  the 
basis  for,  but  a  reflection  of,  the  development  of  the  regime 
itself  from  a  revolutionary  dictatorship  to  a  reactionary  des¬ 
potism.  This  development,  through  struggles  and  disputes, 
demonstrates  how  the  interference  of  government  in  the  econ¬ 
omy,  necessary  at  first,  has  gradually  turned  into  a  vital,  personal 
interest  on  the  part  of  the  ruling  bureaucrats.  Initially,  the 
state  seizes  all  means  of  production  in  order  to  control  all 
investments  for  rapid  industrialization.  Ultimately,  further  eco¬ 
nomic  development  has  come  to  be  guided  mainly  in  the 
interests  of  the  ruling  class. 

Other  types  of  owners  do  not  act  in  an  essentially  different 
manner;  they  are  always  motivated  by  some  sort  of  personal 
interest.  However,  the  thing  that  distinguishes  the  new  class 
from  other  types  of  owners  is  that  it  has  in  its  hands,  more  or 
less,  all  the  national  resources,  and  that  it  is  developing  its  eco¬ 
nomic  power  in  a  deliberate  and  organized  manner.  A  deliberate 
system  of  unification  is  also  used  by  other  classes,  such  as  polit¬ 
ical  and  economic  organizations.  Because  there  are  a  number  of 
owners  and  many  forms  of  property,  all  in  mutual  conflict, 
spontaneity  and  competition  have  been  preserved  in  all  econ- 


103 


104  THE  NEW  CLASS 

omies  preceding  the  Communist  one,  at  least  under  normal 
or  peaceful  conditions. 

Even  the  Communist  economy  has  not  succeeded  in  repress¬ 
ing  spontaneity,  but  in  contrast  to  all  others,  it  constantly 
insists  that  spontaneity  should  be  achieved. 

This  practice  has  its  theoretic  justification.  The  Communist 
leaders  really  believe  that  they  know  economic  laws  and  that 
they  can  administer  production  with  scientific  accuracy.  The 
truth  is  that  the  only  thing  they  know  how  to  do  is  to  seize 
control  of  the  economy.  Their  ability  to  do  this,  just  like  their 
victory  in  the  revolution,  has  created  the  illusion  in  their  minds 
that  they  succeeded  because  of  their  exceptional  scientific 
ability. 

Convinced  of  the  accuracy  of  their  theories,  they  administer 
the  economy  largely  according  to  these  theories.  It  is  a  standard 
joke  that  the  Communists  first  equate  an  economic  measure 
with  a  Marxist  idea  and  then  proceed  to  carry  out  the  measure. 
In  Yugoslavia,  it  has  been  officially  declared  that  planning  is 
conducted  according  to  Marx;  but  Marx  was  neither  a  planner 
nor  a  planning  expert.  In  practice,  nothing  is  done  according 
to  Marx.  However,  the  claim  that  planning  is  conducted  ac¬ 
cording  to  Marx  satisfies  people's  consciences  and  is  used  to 
justify  tyranny  and  economic  domination  for  “ideal”  aims  and 
according  to  “scientific”  discoveries. 

Dogmatism  in  the  economy  is  an  inseparable  part  of  the  Com¬ 
munist  system.  However,  the  forcing  of  the  economy  into  dog¬ 
matic  molds  is  not  the  outstanding  feature  of  the  Communist 
economic  system.  In  this  economy  the  leaders  are  masters  in 
“adapting  "  theory;  they  depart  from  theory  when  it  is  to  their 
interest  to  do  so. 

In  addition  to  being  motivated  by  the  historical  need  for 
rapid  industrialization,  the  Communist  bureaucracy  has  been 
compelled  to  establish  a  type  of  economic  system  designed  to 
insure  the  perpetuation  of  its  own  power.  Allegedly  for  the 
sake  of  a  classless  society  and  for  the  abolition  of  exploitation. 


DOGMATISM  IN  THE  ECONOMY  105 

it  has  created  a  closed  economic  system,  with  forms  of  property 
which  facilitate  the  party’s  domination  and  its  monopoly.  At 
first,  the  Communists  had  to  turn  to  this  “collectivistic”  form 
for  objective  reasons.  Now  they  continue  to  strengthen  this 
form— without  considering  whether  or  not  it  is  in  the  interest 
of  the  national  economy  and  of  further  industrialization— for 
their  own  sake,  for  an  exclusive  Communist  class  aim.  They 
first  administered  and  controlled  the  entire  economy  for  so- 
called  ideal  goals:  later  they  did  it  for  the  purpose  of  main¬ 
taining  their  absolute  control  and  domination.  That  is  the  real 
reason  for  such  far-reaching  and  inflexible  political  measures 
in  the  Communist  economy. 

In  an  interview  in  1956,  Tito  admitted  that  there  are  “so¬ 
cialist  elements”  in  Western  economies,  but  that  they  are  not 
“deliberately”  introduced  into  the  economies  as  such.  This 
expresses  the  whole  Communist  idea:  only  because  “socialism” 
is  established  “deliberately”— by  organized  compulsion— in  the 
economics  of  their  countries  must  the  Communists  preserve 
the  despotic  method  of  governing  and  their  own  monopoly  of 
ownership. 

This  attribution  of  great  and  even  decisive  significance  to 
“deliberateness”  in  the  development  of  the  economy  and  soci¬ 
ety  reveals  the  compulsory  and  selfish  character  of  Communist 
economic  policy.  Otherwise,  why  would  such  an  insistence  on 
deliberateness  be  necessary? 

The  strong  opposition  of  Communists  to  all  forms  of  owner¬ 
ship  except  those  which  they  consider  to  be  socialist  indicates, 
above  all,  their  uncontrollable  desires  to  gain  and  maintain 
power.  They  abandoned  or  altered  this  radical  attitude,  how¬ 
ever,  when  it  was  against  their  interest  to  hold  to  it;  thus  they 
treated  their  own  theory  badly.  In  Yugoslavia,  for  instance, 
they  first  created  and  then  dissolved  the  kolkhozes  in  the  name 
of  “error-free  Marxism”  and  “socialism.”  Today  they  are  pur¬ 
suing  a  third,  and  confused,  middle-of-the-road  line  in  the  same 
matter.  There  are  similar  examples  in  all  Communist  coun- 


106 


THE  NEW  CLASS. 


tries.  However,  the  abolition  of  all  forms  of  private  ownership 
except  their  own  is  their  unchanging  purpose. 

Every  political  system  gives  expression  to  economic  forces 
and  attempts  to  administer  them.  The  Communists  cannot  at¬ 
tain  complete  control  over  production,  but  they  have  succeeded 
in  controlling  it  to  such  an  extent  that  they  continuously  sub¬ 
ordinate  it  to  their  ideological  and  political  goals.  In  this  way. 
Communism  differs  from  every  other  political  system. 


2. 


The  Communists  interpret  the  special  role  of  those  who 
produce  in  terms  of  their  total  ownership  and,  even  more  im¬ 
portant,  often  in  terms  of  the  overriding  role  of  ideology  in 
the  economy. 

Immediately  after  the  revolution,  freedom  of  employment 
tvas  curtailed  in  the  U.S.S.R.  But  the  need  of  the  regime  for 
rapid  industrialization  did  not  bring  about  complete  curtail¬ 
ment  of  such  freedom.  This  took  place  only  after  the  victory  of 
the  industrial  revolution  and  after  the  new  class  had  been 
created.  In  1940  a  law  was  passed  forbidding  freedom  of  em¬ 
ployment  and  punishing  people  for  quitting  their  jobs.  In  this 
period  and  after  World  IVar  II,  a  form  of  slave  labor  developed, 
namely,  the  labor  camps.  Moreover,  the  borderline  between 
tvork  in  the  labor  camps  and  work  in  factories  was  almost  com¬ 
pletely  eliminated. 

Labor  camps  and  various  kinds  of  “voluntary”  work  activities 
are  only  the  worst  and  most  extreme  forms  of  compulsory  labor. 
This  can  be  of  a  temporary  character  in  other  systems  but 
under  Communism  compulsory  labor  has  remained  a  permanent 
feature.  Although  compulsory  labor  did  not  take  the  same  form 
in  other  Communist  countries  nor  develop  there  to  the  extent 
that  it  has  in  the  U.S.S.R.,  none  of  these  countries  has  com¬ 
pletely  free  employment. 


107 


DOGMATISM  IN  THE  ECONOMY 

Compulsory  labor  in  the  Communist  system  is  the  result  of 
monopoly  of  ownership  over  all,  or  almost  all,  national  property. 
The  worker  finds  himself  in  the  position  of  having  not  only  to 
sell  his  labor;  he  must  sell  it  under  conditions  which  are  beyond 
his  control,  since  he  is  unable  to  seek  another,  better  employer. 
There  is  only  one  employer,  the  state.  The  worker  has  no  choice 
but  to  accept  the  employer’s  terms.  The  worst  and  most  harmful 
element  in  early  capitalism  from  the  worker’s  standpoint— the 
labor  market— has  been  replaced  by  the  monopoly  over  labor 
of  the  ownership  of  the  new  class.  This  has  not  made  the  worker 
any  freer. 

In  the  Communist  system  the  worker  is  not  like  the  ancient 
type  of  slave,  not  even  when  he  is  in  compulsory  labor  camps: 
the  ancient  slave  was  treated  both  theoretically  and  practically 
as  an  object.  Even  the  greatest  mind  of  antiquity,  Aristotle, 
believed  that  people  were  born  either  freemen  or  slaves.  Though 
he  believed  in  humane  treatment  of  slaves  and  advocated  the 
reform  of  the  slavery  system,  he  still  regarded  slaves  as  tools  of 
production.  In  the  modern  system  of  technology,  it  is  not  pos¬ 
sible  to  deal  this  way  with  a  worker,  because  only  a  literate  and 
interested  worker  can  do  the  sort  of  work  required.  Compulsory 
labor  in  the  Communist  system  is  quite  different  from  slavery 
in  antiquity  or  in  later  history.  It  is  the  result  of  ownership  and 
political  relationships,  not,  or  only  to  a  slight  extent,  the  result 
of  the  technological  level  of  production. 

Since  modern  technology  requires  a  worker  who  can  dispose 
of  a  considerable  amount  of  freedom,  it  is  in  latent  conflict 
with  compulsory  forms  of  labor,  or  with  the  monopoly  of  owner¬ 
ship  and  the  political  totalitarianism  of  Communism.  Under 
Communism  the  worker  is  technically  free,  but  his  possibilities 
to  use  his  freedom  are  extremely  limited.  The  formal  limita¬ 
tion  of  freedom  is  not  an  inherent  characteristic  of  Commu¬ 
nism,  but  it  is  a  phenomenon  which  occurs  under  Communism. 
It  is  especially  apparent  with  regard  to  work  and  the  labor 
force  itself. 


108 


THE  NEW  CLASS, 


Labor  cannot  be  free  in  a  society  where  all  material  goods  are 
monopolized  by  one  group.  The  labor  force  is  indirectly  the 
property  of  that  group,  although  not  completely  so.  since  the 
worker  is  an  individual  human  being  who  himself  uses  up  part 
of  his  labor.  Speaking  in  the  abstract,  the  labor  force,  taken  as 
a  whole,  is  a  factor  in  total  social  production.  The  new  ruling 
class  with  its  material  and  political  monopoly  uses  this  factor 
almost  to  the  same  extent  that  it  does  other  national  goods  and 
elements  of  production  and  treats  it  the  same  way,  disregard¬ 
ing  the  human  factor. 

Dealing  with  labor  as  a  factor  in  production,  working  con¬ 
ditions  in  various  enterprises,  or  the  connection  between  wages 
and  profits,  are  of  no  concern  to  the  bureaucracy.  Wages  and 
working  conditions  are  determined  in  accordance  with  an  ab¬ 
stract  concept  of  labor,  or  in  accordance  with  individual  quali¬ 
fications,  with  little  or  no  regard  for  the  actual  results  of 
production  in  the  respective  enterprises  or  branches  of  industry. 
This  is  only  a  general  rule;  there  are  exceptions,  depending  on 
conditions  and  requirements.  But  the  system  leads  inevitably 
to  lack  of  interest  on  the  part  of  the  actual  producers,  i.e.,  the 
workers.  It  also  leads  to  low  quality  of  output,  a  decline  in  real 
productivity  and  technological  progress,  and  deterioration  of 
plant.  The  Communists  are  constantly  struggling  for  greater 
productivity  on  the  part  of  the  individual  workers,  paying  little 
or  no  attention  to  the  productivity  of  the  labor  force  as  a  whole. 

In  such  a  system,  efforts  to  stimulate  the  worker  are  inevitable 
and  frequent.  The  bureaucracy  offers  all  kinds  of  awards  and 
allowances  to  counteract  lack  of  interest.  But  as  long  as  the 
Communists  do  not  change  the  system  itself,  as  long  as  they 
retain  their  monopoly  of  all  ownership  and  all  government,  they 
cannot  stimulate  the  individual  worker  for  long,  much  less 
stimulate  the  labor  force  as  a  whole. 

Elaborate  attempts  to  give  the  workers  a  share  in  the  profits 
have  been  made  in  Yugoslavia  and  are  now  being  contemplated 
in  the  East  European  countries.  These  quickly  result  in  the 


DOGMATISM  IN  THE  ECONOMY  109 

retention  of  “excess  profits”  in  the  hands  of  the  bureaucracy 
who  justify  this  action  by  saying  that  they  are  checking  inflation 
and  investing  the  money  wisely.  All  that  remains  for  the  worker 
are  small,  nominal  sums  and  the  “right”  to  suggest  how  they 
should  be  invested  through  the  party  and  trade  union  organi¬ 
zation-through  the  bureaucracy.  Without  the  right  to  strike 
and  to  decide  on  who  owns  what,  the  workers  have  not  had 
much  chance  to  obtain  a  real  share  of  the  profits.  It  has  become 
clear  that  all  these  rights  are  mutually  interwoven  with  various 
forms  of  political  freedom.  They  cannot  be  attained  in  isolation 
from  each  other. 

In  such  a  system,  free  trade  union  organizations  are  impos¬ 
sible,  and  strikes  can  happen  very  rarely,  such  as  the  explosions 
of  worker  dissatisfaction  in  East  Germany  in  1954  and  in 
Poznan  in  1956. 

The  Communists  explain  the  enforced  absence  of  strikes  by 
saying  that  the  “working  class”  is  in  power  and  owns  the 
means  of  production  through  its  state,  so  that  if  it  did  strike, 
it  would  be  striking  against  itself.  This  naive  explanation  is 
based  on  the  fact  that  in  the  Communist  system  the  owner 
of  property  is  not  a  private  individual,  but,  as  we  know, 
camouflaged  by  the  fact  that  he  is  collective  and  formally 
unidentifiable. 

Above  all,  strikes  under  the  Communist  system  are  impos¬ 
sible  because  there  is  only  one  owner  who  is  in  charge  of  all 
goods  and  of  the  entire  labor  force.  It  would  be  hard  to  take 
any  effective  action  against  him  without  the  participation  of 
all  the  workers.  A  strike  of  one  or  more  enterprises— supposing 
that  such  a  thing  could  happen  at  all  under  a  total  dictatorship 
—cannot  really  threaten  that  owner.  His  property  does  not 
consist  of  those  individual  enterprises  but  of  the  production 
machine  as  a  whole.  The  owner  is  not  harmed  by  losses  in 
individual  enterprises,  because  the  producers,  or  society  as  a 
whole,  must  make  up  for  such  losses.  Because  of  this,  strikes 


110  THE  NEW  CLASS 

are  more  of  a  political  than  an  economic  problem  for  the 
Communists. 

While  individual  strikes  are  almost  impossible,  and  hope¬ 
less  as  far  as  potential  results  are  concerned,  there  are  no 
proper  political  conditions  for  general  strikes  and  they  can 
occur  only  in  exceptional  situations.  Whenever  individual 
strikes  have  taken  place,  they  have  usually  changed  into  general 
strikes  and  have  taken  on  a  distinctly  political  character.  In 
addition.  Communist  regimes  constantly  divide  and  disrupt 
the  working  class  by  means  of  paid  functionaries,  raised  from 
its  ranks,  who  “educate”  it,  “uplift  it  ideologically,”  and  direct 
it  in  its  daily  life. 

Trade  union  organizations  and  other  professional  organi¬ 
zations,  because  of  their  purpose  and  function,  can  only  be 
the  appendages  of  a  single  owner  and  jwtentate— the  political 
oligarchy.  Thus,  their  “main”  purpose  is  the  job  of  “building 
socialism”  or  increasing  production.  Their  other  functions  are 
to  spread  illusions  and  an  acquiescent  mood  among  the 
workers.  These  organizations  have  played  only  one  important 
role— the  lifting  of  the  cultural  level  of  the  working  classes. 

Workers’  organizations  under  the  Communist  system  are 
really  “company”  or  “yellow”  organizations  of  a  special  kind. 
The  expression  “of  a  special  kind”  is  used  here  because  the 
employer  is  at  the  same  time  the  government  and  the  exponent 
of  the  predominant  ideology.  In  other  systems  those  two  factors 
are  generally  separate  from  each  other,  so  that  the  workers, 
even  though  unable  to  rely  on  either  one  of  them,  are  at  least 
able  to  take  advantage  of  the  differences  and  conflicts  between 
them. 

It  is  not  accidental  that  the  working  class  is  the  main  con¬ 
cern  of  the  regime;  not  for  idealistic  or  humanitarian  reasons, 
but  simply  because  this  is  the  class  on  which  production  de¬ 
pends  and  on  which  the  rise  and  the  very  existence  of  the  new 
class  depends. 


DOGMATISM  IN  THE  ECONOMY 


111 


3. 

In  spite  of  the  fact  that  there  is  no  free  employment  or  free 
workers’  organizations,  there  is  a  limit  to  exploitation,  even 
in  the  Communist  system.  The  search  for  this  limit  would 
require  a  deeper  and  more  concrete  analysis.  We  will  concern 
ourselves  here  only  with  its  most  important  aspects. 

In  addition  to  political  limits— fear  of  dissatisfaction  among 
the  workers  and  other  considerations  which  are  subject  to 
change— there  are  also  constant  limits  to  exploitation;  the  forms 
and  degrees  of  exploitation  which  become  too  costly  for  the 
system  must  sooner  or  later  be  discontinued. 

Thus,  by  the  decree  of  April  25,  1956,  in  the  U.S.S.R.,  the 
condemnation  of  workers  for  tardiness  or  for  quitting  their 
jobs  was  canceled.  Also  a  great  many  workers  were  released 
from  labor  camps;  these  were  cases  in  which  it  was  impossible 
to  distinguish  between  political  prisoners  and  those  whom  the 
regime  had  thrown  into  labor  camps  because  it  needed  a  labor 
force.  This  decree  did  not  result  in  a  completely  freed  labor 
force,  for  considerable  limitations  still  remained  in  force,  but 
it  did  represent  the  most  significant  progress  made  after  Stalin’s 
death. 

Compulsory  slave  labor  brought  political  difficulties  to  the 
regime  and  also  became  too  costly  as  soon  as  advanced  tech¬ 
nology  was  introduced  in  the  U.S.S.R.  A  slave  laborer,  no 
matter  how  little  you  feed  him,  costs  more  than  he  can  produce 
when  you  count  the  administrative  apparatus  needed  to  assure 
his  coercion.  His  labor  becomes  senseless  and  must  be  discon¬ 
tinued.  Modem  production  limits  exploitation  in  other  ways. 
Machinery  cannot  be  operated  efficiently  by  exhausted  com¬ 
pulsory  labor,  and  adequate  health  and  cultural  conditions 
have  become  an  indispensable  prerequisite. 

The  limits  to  exploitation  in  the  Communist  system  are 
paralleled  by  limits  to  the  freedoms  of  the  labor  force.  These 


112 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


freedoms  are  determined  by  the  nature  of  ownership  and  gov¬ 
ernment.  Until  ownership  and  government  are  changed,  the 
labor  force  cannot  become  free  and  must  remain  subject  to 
moderate  or  severe  forms  of  economic  and  administrative 
coercion. 

Because  of  its  production  needs,  a  Communist  regime  regu¬ 
lates  labor  conditions  and  the  status  of  the  labor  force.  It  takes 
many-sided  and  all-encompassing  social  measures:  it  regulates 
such  things  as  working  hours,  vacations,  insurance,  education, 
the  labor  of  women  and  children.  Many  of  these  measures  are 
largely  nominal;  many  are  also  of  a  progressively  harmful 
character. 

In  a  Communist  system  the  tendency  to  regulate  labor  rela¬ 
tions  and  to  maintain  order  and  peace  in  production  is  constant. 
The  single  and  collective  owner  solves  labor-force  problems 
on  an  all-encompassing  scale.  It  cannot  support  “anarchy”  in 
anything,  and  certainly  not  in  the  labor  force.  It  must  regulate 
it  just  as  much  as  every  other  aspect  of  production. 

The  great  boast  that  there  is  full  employment  in  Communist 
systems  cannot  hide  the  wounds  which  become  evident  as  one 
looks  more  closely.  As  soon  as  all  material  goods  are  controlled 
by  one  body,  these  goods,  like  manpower  needs,  must  become 
the  subject  of  planning.  Political  necessities  play  an  important 
role  in  planning  and  this  unavoidably  results  in  the  retention 
of  a  number  of  branches  of  industry,  which  survive  at  the 
expense  of  others.  Thus  planning  hides  actual  unemployment. 
As  soon  as  sectors  of  the  economy  can  engage  in  freer  play,  or 
as  soon  as  it  becomes  unnecessary  for  the  regime  to  sustain  and 
strengthen  one  branch  at  the  expense  of  another,  unemploy¬ 
ment  will  recur.  More  extensive  ties  with  the  world  market 
can  also  cause  this  trend. 

Consequently,  full  employment  is  not  the  result  of  Com¬ 
munist  “socialism”  but  of  an  economic  policy  carried  out  by 
command;  in  the  final  analysis,  full  employment  is  the  result 
of  disharmony  and  production  inefficiency.  It  does  not  reveal 


DOGMATISM  IN  THE  ECONOMY  IIS 

the  power  but  the  weakness  of  the  economy.  Yugoslavia  was 
short  of  workers  until  it  achieved  a  satisfactory  degree  of  pro¬ 
duction  efficiency.  As  soon  as  it  did,  there  was  unemployment. 
Unemployment  would  be  even  higher  if  Yugoslavia  attained 
maximum  production  efficiency. 

In  Communist  economies  full  employment  conceals  unem¬ 
ployment.  The  poverty  of  all  conceals  the  unemployment  of 
some,  just  as  the  phenomenal  progress  of  some  sectors  of  the 
economy  conceals  tlie  backwardness  of  others. 

By  the  same  token,  this  type  of  monopoly  ownership  and 
government  is  able  to  prevent  economic  collapse,  but  incapable 
of  preventing  chronic  crises.  The  selfish  interests  of  the  new 
class  and  the  ideological  character  of  the  economy  make  it 
impossible  to  maintain  a  healthy  and  harmonious  system. 


4. 

Marx  was  not  the  first  to  visualize  the  economy  of  future 
society  on  a  planned  basis.  But  he  was  the  first,  or  among  the 
first,  to  recognize  that  a  modern  economy  unavoidably  tends 
toward  planning  because,  in  addition  to  social  reasons,  it  is 
being  established  on  the  basis  of  scientific  technology.  Monopo¬ 
lies  were  the  first  to  plan  on  a  gigantic  national  and  inter¬ 
national  scale.  Today,  planning  is  a  general  phenomenon  and 
an  important  element  of  the  economic  policy  of  most  govern¬ 
ments,  even  though  it  has  a  different  character  in  industrially 
developed  countries  from  that  in  industrially  undeveloped  ones. 
Planning  becomes  necessary  when  production  reaches  an  ad¬ 
vanced  stage  and  when  social,  international,  and  other  condi¬ 
tions  are  subject  to  similar  trends.  It  does  not  have  much  con¬ 
nection  with  anyone’s  theories,  let  alone  those  of  Marx,  which 
were  constructed  on  a  far  lower  level  of  social  and  economic 
relations. 


114 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


When  the  U.S.S.R.  became  the  first  country  to  embark  upon 
national  planning,  its  leaders,  who  were  Marxists,  connected 
this  planning  with  Marxism.  The  truth  is  this:  although 
Marx’s  teachings  were  the  idealistic  basis  of  the  revolution  in 
Russia,  his  teachings  also  became  the  cover  for  later  measures 
taken  by  the  Soviet  leaders. 

All  of  the  historical  and  specific  reasons  for  Soviet  planning 
were  attributed  to  corresponding  theories.  Marx’s  theory  was 
the  closest  and  most  acceptable  because  of  the  social  basis  and 
the  past  of  the  Communist  movement. 

Although  leaning  heavily  on  Marx  in  the  beginning.  Com¬ 
munist  planning  has  a  more  profound  idealistic  and  material 
background.  How  can  an  economy  be  administered  other  than 
as  a  planned  economy  when  it  has  or  is  going  to  have  a  single 
owner?  How  could  such  tremendous  investments  be  made  for 
the  purpose  of  industrializing  if  they  were  not  planned? 
Something  must  be  needed  before  it  can  become  an  ideal.  So 
it  is  with  Communist  planning.  It  is  dedicated  to  the  develop>- 
ment  of  those  branches  of  the  economy  which  will  insure  the 
strengthening  of  the  regime.  This  is  the  general  rule,  although 
in  every  Communist  country,  especially  those  which  become 
independent  of  Moscow,  there  are  exceptions  to  this  rule. 

Of  course,  the  development  of  the  national  economy  as  a 
whole  is  important  for  the  strengthening  of  the  regime,  for  it 
is  impossible  permanently  to  separate  progress  in  one  branch 
of  production  from  another.  Planning  emphasis  in  every  Com¬ 
munist  system  is  always  directed  toward  branches  of  the 
economy  that  are  considered  to  be  of  decisive  importance  in 
maintaining  the  political  stability  of  the  regime.  These  branches 
are  ones  that  enhance  the  role,  power,  and  privileges  of  the 
bureaucracy.  They  also  are  the  ones  that  strengthen  the  regime 
in  its  relations  to  other  countries  and  make  it  possible  for  the 
regime  to  industrialize  to  a  greater  degree.  Up  to  now,  they 
have  been  branches  of  heavy  and  war  industries.  This  does  not 
mean  that  the  situation  cannot  change  in  individual  countries. 


DOGMATISM  IN  THE  ECONOMY 


119 


Recently  atomic  energy,  especially  in  the  U.S.S.R.,  has  begun 
to  take  first  place  in  the  plan;  I  should  say  that  this  is  happen¬ 
ing  because  of  military,  foreign  and  political  considerations 
rather  than  for  any  other. 

Everything  is  subordinated  to  these  aims.  Consequently, 
many  branches  of  the  economy  are  lagging  and  working 
inefficiently;  disproportions  and  difficulties  are  inevitable;  and 
excessive  production  costs  and  chronic  inflation  are  rampant. 
According  to  Andr6  Philipe  (in  the  New  Leader,  October  1, 
1956),  investments  in  heavy  industry  in  the  U.S.S.R.  increased 
from  the  53.3  per  cent  of  total  investments  in  1954  to  60  per 
cent  of  total  investments  in  1955.  Twenty-one  per  cent  of  the 
net  national  income  is  being  invested  in  industry,  with  a  con¬ 
centration  on  heavy  industry,  although  heavy  industry  only 
contributed  7.4  per  cent  to  the  increase  in  income  per  capita, 
6.4  per  cent  of  which  was  due  to  increased  production. 

It  is  understandable  why,  under  such  conditions,  the  standard 
of  living  is  the  last  concern  of  the  new  owners,  even  though, 
as  Marx  himself  maintains,  men  are  the  most  important  factor 
in  production.  According  to  Edward  Crankshaw,  who  is  close 
to  the  British  Labour  Party,  a  desperate  battle  for  survival  must 
be  fought  in  the  U.S.S.R.  by  those  who  earn  less  than  600  rubles 
monthly.  Harry  Schwartz,  the  New  York  Times  expert  on  the 
Soviet  Union,  has  estimated  that  approximately  eight  million 
workers  earn  less  than  300  rubles  monthly,  and  the  Tribune, 
representing  the  point  of  view  of  the  British  Labour  Party’s  left 
wing,  adds  the  comment  that  this,  and  not  the  equality  of  sexes, 
is  the  reason  for  the  large  number  of  women  employed  at  heavy 
labor.  The  recent  30-per-cent  wage  increase  in  the  U.S.S.R.  has 
applied  to  these  low-wage  categories. 

This  is  the  way  it  is  in  the  U.S.S.R.  It  is  not  much  different 
in  other  Communist  countries,  not  even  in  countries  like 
Czechoslovakia  which  are  technologically  very  advanced.  Once 
an  exporter  of  agricultural  products,  Yugoslavia  now  imports 
them.  According  to  official  statistics,  the  standard  of  living  of 


116  THE  NEW  CLASS 

blue-  and  white-collar  workers  is  lower  than  before  World 
War  II,  when  Yugoslavia  was  an  undeveloped  capitalist  country. 

Communist  planning,  devoted  to  political  class  interests,  and 
totalitarian  dictatorship  supplement  each  other.  For  ideologic 
reasons.  Communists  invest  intensively  in  certain  branches  of 
the  economy.  All  planning  revolves  around  these  branches. 
This  leads  to  deep  displacements  in  the  economy  which  cannot 
be  paid  for  by  income  from  nationalized  farms  taken  over  from 
capitalists  and  large  landowners,  but  must  be  paid  for  mainly 
through  the  imposition  of  low  wages  and  the  pillaging  of  peas¬ 
ants  through  the  compulsory  crop-purchase  system. 

It  might  be  said  that  if  the  U.S.S.R.  had  not  done  such  plan¬ 
ning,  or  if  it  had  not  concentrated  on  the  development  of  heavy 
industry,  it  would  have  entered  World  War  II  unarmed  and 
would  have  been  the  easily  conquered  slave  of  the  Hitler  in¬ 
vasion.  This 's  correct,  but  only  to  a  certain  degree.  For  guns 
and  tanks  are  not  the  only  strength  of  a  country.  If  Stalin  had 
not  had  imperialistic  aims  in  his  foreign  policy  and  tyrannical 
aims  in  his  internal  policy,  no  grouping  of  powers  would  have 
left  his  country  standing  alone  before  the  invader. 

This  is  clear:  the  ideological  approach  to  planning  and  de¬ 
velopment  of  the  economy  was  not  essential  for  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  a  war  industry.  It  was  put  into  action  because  of  the 
power-holders’  need  to  be  independent  internally  and  ex¬ 
ternally;  defense  needs  were  only  associate  needs,  even  though 
they  were  inevitable.  Russia  could  have  obtained  the  same  quan¬ 
tities  of  armaments,  proceeding  under  different  plans,  linking 
her  more  closely  with  foreign  markets.  Greater  dependency  on 
foreign  markets  would  have  necessitated  a  different  foreign 
policy.  Under  present-day  conditions,  where  world  interests  are 
interlaced  and  where  wars  are  total,  butter  is  almost  as  impor¬ 
tant  as  guns  in  the  waging  of  war.  This  was  confirmed  even  in 
the  case  of  the  U.S.S.R.  Food  from  the  United  States  was  almost 
as  important  for  victory  as  war  materiel. 


DOGMATISM  IN  THE  ECONOMY  117 

The  same  is  true  with  regard  to  agriculture.  Under  present- 
day  conditions,  progressive  agriculture  also  means  indus¬ 
trialization.  Progressive  agriculture  does  not  insure  that  a 
Communist  regime  will  be  independent  of  the  outside.  Inter¬ 
nally  it  makes  the  regime  dependent  on  the  peasant,  even 
though  the  peasants  are  members  of  free  cooperatives.  Conse¬ 
quently  steel  has  been  given  priority  in  the  plan,  right  beside 
kolkhozes  with  low  production.  The  planning  of  political 
power  had  to  come  ahead  of  economic  progress. 

Soviet,  or  Communist,  planning  is  of  a  special  kind.  It  has 
not  evolved  as  the  result  of  the  technological  development  of 
production  nor  as  the  result  of  the  “socialist”  consciousness  of 
its  initiators.  Instead  it  has  evolved  as  the  result  of  a  special 
type  of  government  and  ownership.  Today,  technical  and  other 
factors  are  influencing  this  type  of  planning,  but  these  other 
factors  have  not  ceased  to  have  their  effect  on  the  evolution 
of  this  type  of  planning.  It  is  very  important  to  note  this,  for 
it  is  the  key  to  understanding  the  character  of  this  type  of  plan¬ 
ning,  and  of  the  capabilities  of  a  Communist  economy. 

The  results  achieved  by  such  an  economy  and  by  such  plan¬ 
ning  are  varied.  The  concentration  of  all  means  to  achieve  a 
specific  purpose  make  it  possible  for  the  power-wielders  to 
progress  with  extraordinary  speed  in  certain  branches  of  the 
economy.  The  progress  that  the  U.S.S.R.  has  achieved  in  some 
branches  has  heretofore  never  been  achieved  anywhere  in  the 
world.  However,  when  one  considers  the  backward  conditions 
existing  in  other  branches  the  progress  achieved  is  not  justified 
from  the  over-all  economic  point  of  view. 

Of  course,  once-backward  Russia  has  attained  second  place 
in  world  production  as  far  as  its  most  important  branches  of 
the  economy  are  concerned.  It  has  become  the  mightiest  conti¬ 
nental  power  in  the  world.  A  strong  working  class,  a  wide  stra¬ 
tum  of  technical  intelligentsia,  and  the  materials  for  consumer 
goods  production  have  been  created.  The  dictatorship  has  not 


118  THENEWCLAS$ 

been  essentially  weakened  because  of  this,  nor  are  there  any 
reasons  to  believe  that  the  standard  of  living  cannot  be  im¬ 
proved  in  proportion  to  the  country’s  economic  capabilities. 

Ownership  and  political  considerations  for  which  the  plan 
is  only  an  implement  have  made  it  impossible  to  weaken  the 
dictatorship  to  any  extent  or  to  raise  the  standard  of  living. 
The  exclusive  monopoly  of  a  single  group,  in  the  economy  as 
well  as  in  politics,  planning  that  is  directed  toward  increasing 
its  power  and  its  interests  in  the  country  and  throughout  the 
world,  continuously  postpones  the  improvement  of  the  standard 
of  living  and  harmonious  development  of  the  economy.  The 
absence  of  freedom  is  undoubtedly  the  final  and  most  impor¬ 
tant  reason  for  the  postponement.  In  Communist  systems  free¬ 
dom  has  become  the  main  economic  and  general  problem. 


5. 

The  Communist  planned  economy  conceals  within  itself  an 
anarchy  of  a  special  kind.  In  spite  of  the  fact  that  it  is  planned, 
the  Communist  economy  is  perhaps  the  most  wasteful  economy 
in  the  history  of  hitman  society.  Such  claims  may  seem  strange, 
especially  if  one  has  in  mind  the  relatively  rapid  development 
of  individual  branches  of  the  economy,  and  of  the  economy  as 
a  whole.  However,  they  have  a  solid  basis. 

Wastefulness  of  fantastic  proportions  was  unavoidable  even 
if  this  had  not  been  a  group  which  considered  everything,  in¬ 
cluding  the  economy,  from  its  own  narrow  ownership  and 
ideological  point  of  view.  How  could  a  single  group  of  this 
kind  administer  a  complex  modern  economy  effectively  and 
thriftily— an  economy  which,  in  spite  of  the  most  complete 
planning,  showed  varied  and  often  contradictory  internal  and 
external  tendencies  from  day  to  day?  The  absence  of  any  type 
of  criticism,  even  of  any  ty{>e  of  important  suggestion,  inevitably 
leads  to  waste  and  stagnation. 


DOGMATISM  IN  THE  ECONOMY  119 

Because  of  this  political  and  economic  omnipotence,  waste¬ 
ful  undertakings  cannot  be  avoided  even  with  the  best  of 
intentions.  Very  little  attention  is  paid  to  what  the  cost  of 
these  undertakings  is  to  the  economy  as  a  whole.  How  great 
are  the  costs  to  a  nation  of  an  agriculture  which  is  stagnant 
because  of  the  superstitious  Communist  fear  of  the  peasant 
and  unreasonable  investments  in  heavy  industry?  What  is  the 
cost  of  capital  invested  in  inefficient  industries?  What  is  the 
cost  of  a  stagnant  transportation  system?  What  is  the  cost  of 
poorly  paid  workers,  who  consequently  “goldbrick”  and  work 
slowly?  What  is  the  cost  of  poor-quality  production?  There  is 
no  counting  these  costs,  nor  can  they  be  calculated. 

Just  as  they  administer  the  economy,  the  Communist  leaders 
handle  everything  in  a  way  contrary  to  their  own  teaching: 
that  is,  from  their  personal  viewpoint.  The  economy  is  just 
an  area  which  least  tolerates  arbitrariness.  Even  if  they  wished 
to  do  so,  the  leaders  could  not  take  into  consideration  the 
interests  of  the  economy  as  a  whole.  For  political  reasons  the 
ruling  group  determines  what  is  "vitally  necessary,”  “of  key 
importance,”  or  "decisive”  in  a  movement.  Nothing  stands  in 
the  way  of  its  carrying  out  the  matter  in  question,  for  the 
group  is  not  afraid  of  losing  its  power  or  property. 

Periodically  the  leaders  indulge  in  criticism  or  self<riticism 
and  cite  experience  when  there  is  evidence  that  something  is 
not  progressing  or  when  tremendous  waste  has  become  ap¬ 
parent.  Khrushchev  criticized  Stalin  for  his  agricultural  policy. 
Tito  criticized  his  own  regime  for  excessive  capital  investments 
and  the  waste  of  billions.  Ochab  criticized  himself  for  this  “con¬ 
ditional”  neglect  of  the  standard  of  living.  But  the  essence 
remains  the  same.  The  same  men  prolong  the  same  system  by 
about  the  same  method,  until  breaches  and  “irregularities” 
become  apparent.  Losses  incurred  can  no  longer  be  restored, 
so  the  regime  and  the  party  do  not  take  the  responsibility  for 
the  losses.  They  have  “noted"  the  errors  and  these  errors  will 
be  “corrected.”  So  let’s  begin  all  over  againi 


120  THE  NEW  CLASS 

There  is  no  evidence  that  a  single  Communist  leader  has 
suffered  because  of  unproductively  expended  or  fantastically 
wasted  means.  But  many  have  been  deposed  because  of  “ideo¬ 
logical  deviations.” 

Tn  Communist  systems,  thefts  and  misappropriations  are  in¬ 
evitable.  It  is  not  just  poverty  that  motivates  people  to  steal 
the  “national  property”;  but  the  fact  that  the  property  does 
not  seem  to  belong  to  anyone.  All  valuables  are  somehow 
rendered  valueless,  thus  creating  a  favorable  atmosphere  for 
theft  and  waste.  In  1954,  in  Yugoslavia  alone,  over  20,000  cases 
of  theft  of  “socialist  property”  were  discovered.  The  Com¬ 
munist  leaders  handle  national  property  as  their  own,  but  at 
the  same  time  they  waste  it  as  if  it  were  somebody  else’s.  Such 
is  the  nature  of  owmership  and  government  of  the  system. 

The  greatest  waste  is  not  even  visible.  This  is  the  waste  of 
manpower.  The  slow,  unproductive  work  of  disinterested  mil¬ 
lions,  together  with  the  prevention  of  all  work  not  considered 
“socialist,”  is  the  calculable,  invisible,  and  gigantic  waste  which 
no  Communist  regime  has  been  able  to  avoid.  Even  though  they 
are  adherents  of  Smith’s  theory  that  labor  creates  value,  a 
theory  which  Marx  adopted,  these  power-wielders  pay  the  least 
attention  to  labor  and  manpower,  regarding  them  as  something 
of  very  little  value  which  can  be  readily  replaced. 

The  fear  which  Communists  have  of  “the  renewal  of  capital¬ 
ism,”  or  of  economic  consequences  that  would  arise  from 
narrow  class  “ideological”  motives,  has  cost  the  nation  tremen¬ 
dous  wealth  and  put  a  brake  on  its  development.  Entire 
industries  are  destroyed  because  the  state  is  not  in  a  position 
to  maintain  or  develop  them;  only  that  which  is  the  state’s  is 
considered  “socialist.” 

How  far  and  how  long  can  a  nation  carry  on  like  this? 
The  moment  is  approaching  when  industrialization,  which  first 
made  Communism  inevitable,  will  through  further  develop¬ 
ment  make  the  Communist  form  of  government  and  ownership 
superfluous. 


DOGMATISM  IN  THE  ECONOMY  121 

The  waste  is  tremendous  because  of  the  isolation  of  Com¬ 
munist  economies.  Every  Communist  economy  is  essentially 
autarchic.  The  reasons  for  this  autarchy  lie  in  the  character  of 
its  government  and  ownership. 

No  Communist  country— not  even  Yugoslavia,  which  was 
obliged  to  cooperate  to  a  greater  extent  with  non-Communist 
countries  because  of  its  conflict  with  Moscow— has  been  success¬ 
ful  in  developing  foreign  trade  beyond  the  traditional  exchange 
of  goods.  Planned  production  on  a  larger  scale  in  cooperation 
with  other  countries  has  not  been  attained. 

Communist  planning,  among  other  things,  takes  very  little 
account  of  the  needs  of  world  markets  or  of  the  production  in 
other  countries.  Partly  as  a  result  of  this,  and  partly  as  a  result 
of  ideological  and  other  motives.  Communist  governments  take 
too  little  account  of  natural  conditions  affecting  production. 
They  often  construct  industrial  plants  without  having  sufficient 
raw  materials  available  for  them,  and  almost  never  pay  atten¬ 
tion  to  the  world  level  of  price  and  production.  They  produce 
some  products  at  several  times  the  production  cost  in  other 
countries.  Simultaneously,  other  branches  of  industry  which 
could  surpass  the  world  average  in  productivity,  or  which 
could  produce  at  lower  prices  than  the  world  average,  are 
neglected.  Entire  new  industries  are  being  developed,  even 
though  world  markets  are  surfeited  with  the  items  they  will 
produce.  The  working  people  have  to  pay  for  all  this  in  order 
to  make  the  oligarchs  “independent.” 

This  is  one  aspect  of  the  problem  common  to  Communist 
regimes.  Another  is  the  senseless  race  of  the  “leading  Socialist 
country”— the  U.S.S.R.— to  overtake  and  pass  the  most  highly 
developed  countries.  What  does  this  cost?  And  where  does  it 
lead? 

Perhaps  the  U.S.S.R.  can  overtake  some  branches  of  the  econ¬ 
omy  of  the  most  highly  developed  countries.  By  infinite  waste 
of  manpower,  by  low  wages,  and  by  neglect  of  the  other 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


122 

branches  of  industry,  this  may  be  possible.  It  is  quite  another 
question  whether  this  is  economically  justifiable. 

Such  plans  are  aggressive  in  themselves.  What  does  the  non- 
Communist  world  think  of  the  fact  that  the  U.S.S.R.  is  deter¬ 
mined  to  hold  first  place  in  the  production  of  steel  and 
crude  oil  at  the  cost  of  a  low  standard  of  living?  What  is  left 
of  “coexistence”  and  “peace-loving  cooperation”  if  they  con¬ 
sist  of  competition  in  heavy  industry  and  of  very  small  trade 
exchanges?  What  is  left  of  cooperation  if  the  Communist  econ¬ 
omies  develop  autarchically,  but  penetrate  the  world  mostly 
for  ideological  reasons? 

Such  plans  and  relations  waste  domestic  and  world  manpower 
and  wealth  and  are  unjustified  from  every  viewpoint  except 
that  of  the  Communist  oligarchy.  Technical  progress  and 
changing  vital  needs  make  one  branch  of  the  economy  impor¬ 
tant  one  moment  and  another  the  next;  this  is  true  for  nations 
and  for  the  world.  What  will  happen  if,  fifty  years  from  now, 
steel  and  petroleum  lose  the  significance  they  hold  today?  The 
Communist  leaders  take  no  account  of  this  and  many  other 
things. 

Efforts  at  linking  the  Communist  economies,  the  Soviet  first 
of  all,  to  the  rest  of  the  world,  and  at  the  penetration  of  the 
world  by  these  economies,  are  far  behind  the  actual  technical 
and  other  capabilities  of  these  economies.  At  their  present  stage 
these  economies  could  cooperate  with  the  rest  of  the  world  to 
a  much  greater  degree  than  they  actually  do.  The  failure  to 
use  their  capabilities  for  cooperation  with  the  outside  world 
and  the  rush  to  penetrate  the  outer  world  for  ideological  and 
other  reasons  are  caused  by  the  monopoly  that  the  Communists 
hold  over  the  economy  and  by  their  need  to  maintain  potver. 

Lenin  was  largely  right  when  he  stated  that  politics  is  a 
“concentrated  economy.”  This  has  been  reversed  in  the  Com¬ 
munist  system;  economy  has  become  concentrated  politics;  that 
is,  ptolitics  play  an  almost  decisive  role  in  the  economy. 

Separation  from  the  world  market,  or  she  creation  of  a  “w'orld 


DOGMATISM  IN  THE  ECONOMY  125 

socialist”  market,  which  Stalin  inaugurated  and  to  which  Soviet 
leaders  still  pledge  allegiance,  represents  perhaps  the  major 
reason  for  world  strain  and  world-wide  waste. 

Monopoly  of  ownership,  antiquated  methods  of  production- 
no  matter  whose  or  what  kind— are  in  conflict  with  the  world 
economic  needs.  Freedom  vs.  ownership  has  become  a  world 
problem. 

The  abolishment  of  private,  or  capitalist,  ownership  in  the 
backward  Communist  states  has  made  possible  rapid,  if  not 
smooth,  economic  progress.  The  states  have  become  uncom¬ 
monly  great  physical  powers,  new  and  resistant,  with  a  self- 
righteous  and  fanatical  class  which  has  tasted  the  fruits  of 
authority  and  ownership.  This  development  cannot  solve  any 
of  the  questions  that  were  of  concern  to  classic  socialism  of 
the  nineteenth  century,  nor  even  those  that  were  of  concern 
to  Lenin;  still  less  can  it  insure  economic  advancement  without 
internal  difficulties  and  convulsions. 

Despite  its  powerful  concentration  of  forces  in  one  pair  of 
hands  and  its  rapid  if  unbalanced  successes,  the  Communist 
economic  system  has  been  showing  deep  fissures  and  weaknesses 
since  the  moment  of  its  complete  victory.  Even  though  it  has 
not  yet  reached  the  height  of  its  power  it  is  already  running 
into  difficulties.  Its  future  is  less  and  less  secure;  the  Com¬ 
munist  economic  system  will  have  to  battle  furiously,  inside 
and  outside,  for  its  existence. 


Tyranny  over  the  Mind 

1. 


There  is  only  partial  justification  for  seeking,  in  Communist 
philosophy,  the  sources  of  tyranny  over  the  mind,  a  tyranny 
which  the  Communists  exercise  with  clinical  refinement  when 
they  come  to  power.  Communist  materialism  is  possibly  more 
exclusive  than  any  other  contemporary  view  of  the  world.  It 
pushes  its  adherents  into  the  position  which  makes  it  impossible 
for  them  to  hold  any  other  viewpoint.  If  this  view  were  not 
connected  with  specific  forms  of  government  and  ownership, 
the  monstrous  methods  of  oppression  and  destruction  of  the 
human  mind  could  not  be  explained  by  the  view  itself. 

Every  ideology,  every  opinion,  tries  to  represent  itself  as  the 
only  true  one  and  complete  one.  This  is  innate  in  man’s 
thinking. 

It  was  not  the  idea  itself  but  the  method  by  which  the  idea 
was  applied  that  distinguished  Marx  and  Engels.  They  denied 
every  scientific  and  progressive  socialist  value  in  the  thinking 
of  their  contemporaries,  usually  lumping  such  ideas  into  “bour¬ 
geois  science,”  thus  banning  every  serious  discussion  and  study 
in  advance. 

The  idea  that  was  especially  narrow  and  exclusive  with  Marx 
and  Engels,  the  idea  from  which  Communism  later  could  draw 


124 


TYRANNY  OVER  THE  MIND 


125 


substance  for  its  ideological  Intolerance,  was  that  of  the  insep¬ 
arability  of  the  political  views  of  a  contemporary  scientist, 
thinker,  or  artist  from  his  real  or  scientific  value  as  a  thinker 
or  artist.  If  one  was  found  in  the  opposite  camp  politically, 
his  every  other  objective  or  other  work  was  opposed  or  dis¬ 
regarded. 

This  position  of  Marx  and  Engels  can  be  only  partially  ex¬ 
plained  as  the  result  of  the  furious  opposition  of  the  owners 
and  power-holders  agitated  by  the  “specter  of  Communism” 
from  the  very  beginning. 

The  exclusiveness  of  Marx  and  Engels  was  born  and  inten¬ 
sified  by  something  else  that  was  at  the  roots  of  what  they  had 
learned:  convinced  that  they  had  plumbed  the  depths  of  every 
philosophy,  they  thought  that  it  was  impossible  for  anyone  to 
attain  anything  significant  without  taking  their  own  view  of 
the  world  as  the  basis.  Out  of  the  scientific  atmosphere  of  the 
epoch  and  out  of  the  needs  of  the  socialist  movement,  Marx 
and  Engels  came  to  think  that  anything  that  was  not  important 
to  them,  or  to  the  movement,  was  not  important,  even  objec¬ 
tively;  that  is,  if  it  was  independent  of  the  movement,  it  was 
not  important. 

Consequently,  they  proceeded  practically  unaware  of  the 
most  important  minds  of  their  time,  and  disdained  the  views 
of  opponents  in  their  own  movement.  The  writings  of  Marx 
and  Engels  contain  no  mention  of  such  a  well-known  philos¬ 
opher  as  Schopenhauer  or  of  an  aestheticist  like  Taine.  There 
is  no  mention  of  the  well-known  writers  and  artists  of  their 
{>eriod.  There  is  not  even  any  reference  to  those  who  were 
caught  up  in  the  ideological  and  social  stream  to  which  Marx 
and  Engels  belonged.  They  settled  their  accounts  with  their 
oppositionists  in  the  socialist  movement  in  a  fierce  and  intoler¬ 
ant  manner.  This  was  perhaps  not  important  for  the  sociology 
of  Proudhon,  but  it  was  very  important  for  the  development 


126  THE  NEW  CLASS 

of  socialism  and  social  struggles,  especially  in  France.  The 
same  may  be  said  of  Bakunin.  Slaughtering  Proudhon’s  ideas, 
Marx,  in  his  Misery  of  Philosophy,  scornfully  went  beyond 
his  real  role.  He  and  Engels  did  the  same  with  the  German 
socialist,  Lassalle,  as  well  as  with  other  oppositionists  inside 
their  own  movement. 

On  the  other  hand,  they  carefully  noted  the  significant  in¬ 
tellectual  phenomena  of  their  time.  They  accepted  Darwin. 
They  particularly  grasped  the  currents  of  the  past— ancient  and 
Renaissance— from  which  European  culture  had  developed.  In 
sociology  they  borrowed  from  English  political  economy  (Smith 
and  Ricardo) ;  in  philosophy,  from  classic  German  philosophy 
(Kant,  Hegel) ;  and  in  social  theory,  from  Erench  socialism,  or 
from  the  currents  that  emerged  after  the  Erench  revolution. 
These  were  the  great  scientific,  intellectual,  and  social  currents 
that  created  the  democratic  and  progressive  climate  of  Europe 
and  the  rest  of  the  world. 

There  is  logic  and  consistency  in  the  development  of  Com¬ 
munism.  Marx  was  more  of  a  scientist,  more  objective  than 
Lenin,  who  was  above  all  a  great  revolutionary,  formed  under 
the  conditions  of  Czarist  absolutism,  semi-colonial  Russian 
capitalism,  and  world  conflicts  by  monopolists  for  spheres  of 
influence. 

Leaning  on  Marx,  Lenin  taught  that  materialism  was  pro¬ 
gressive  as  a  rule  throughout  history,  and  that  idealism  was 
reactionary.  This  was  not  only  one-sided  and  incorrect,  but  it 
intensified  Marx’s  exclusiveness.  It  also  emanated  from  insuffi¬ 
cient  knowledge  of  historical  philosophy.  In  1909,  when  Lenin 
wrote  his  Materialism  and  Empiro-Criticism,  he  was  not  closely 
acquainted  with  any  great  philosopher,  classical  or  modem. 
Because  of  the  need  to  overcome  oppositionists  whose  views 
hindered  the  development  of  his  party,  Lenin  rejected  every¬ 
thing  that  was  not  in  accord  with  Marxist  views.  To  him,  any¬ 
thing  was  erroneous  and  valueless  if  it  was  not  in  accord  with 
original  Marxism.  It  must  be  acknowledged  that,  in  this  respect. 


TYRANNY  OVER  THE  MIND  127 

his  works  are  outstanding  examples  of  logical  and  persuasive 
dogmatism. 

Believing  that  materialism  had  always  been  the  ideology  of 
revolutionary  and  subversive  social  movements,  he  drew  the 
one-sided  conclusion  that  materialism  was  generally  progres¬ 
sive-even  in  the  fields  of  research  and  in  the  development  of 
man’s  thought— while  idealism  was  reactionary.  Lenin  confused 
form  and  method  with  content  and  with  scientific  discovery. 
The  fact  that  anyone  was  idealistic  in  his  thinking  was  sufficient 
for  Lenin  to  disregard  his  real  value  and  the  value  of  his  dis¬ 
coveries.  Lenin  extended  his  political  intolerance  to  practically 
the  entire  history  of  human  thought. 

By  1920,  Bertrand  Russell,  the  British  philosopher  who  wel¬ 
comed  the  October  Revolution,  had  accurately  noted  the  es¬ 
sence  of  Leninist,  or  Communist,  dogmatism:* 

There  is,  however,  another  aspect  of  Bolshevism  from  which 
I  differ  more  fundamentally.  Bolshevism  is  not  merely  a  po¬ 
litical  doctrine:  it  is  also  a  religion,  with  elaborate  dogmas 
and  inspired  scriptures.  When  Lenin  wishes  to  prove  some 
proposition,  he  does  so,  if  possible,  by  quoting  texts  from 
Marx  and  Engels.  A  full-fledged  Communist  is  not  merely  a 
man  who  believes  that  land  and  capital  should  be  held  in 
common,  and  their  produce  distributed  as  nearly  equally  as 
possible.  He  is  a  man  who  entertains  a  number  of  elaborate 
and  dogmatic  beliefs— such  as  philosophic  materialism,  for 
example— which  may  be  true,  but  are  not,  to  a  scientific  tem¬ 
per,  capable  of  being  known  with  any  certainty.  This  habit, 
of  militant  certainty  about  objectively  doubtful  matters,  is 
one  from  which,  since  the  Renaissance,  the  world  has  been 
gradually  emerging,  into  that  temper  of  constructive  and  fruit¬ 
ful  skepticism  which  constitutes  the  scientific  outlook.  I  be¬ 
lieve  the  scientific  outlook  to  be  immeasurably  important  to 
the  human  race.  If  a  more  just  economic  system  were  only 
attainable  by  closing  men’s  minds  against  free  inquiry,  and 
plunging  them  back  into  the  intellectual  prison  of  the  middle 


From  Bolshevism:  Practice  and  Theory;  New  York,  Harcourc,  Brace  &  Howe. 


128 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


ages,  I  should  consider  the  price  too  high.  It  cannot  be  denied 
that,  over  any  short  period  of  time,  dogmatic  belief  is  a  help 
in  fighting. 

But  this  was  Lenin’s  period. 

Stalin  went  further;  he  “devoloped”  Lenin,  but  without 
having  Lenin’s  knowledge  or  depth.  Careful  research  tvould 
lead  to  the  conclusion  that  this  man,  whom  Khrushchev  himself 
today  acknowledges  to  have  been  the  “best  Marxist”  of  his  time, 
had  not  even  read  Marx’s  Das  Kapital,  the  most  important 
work  on  Marxism.  Practical  soul  that  he  was,  and  supported  by 
his  extreme  dogmatism,  it  was  not  even  necessary  for  him  to 
be  acquainted  with  Marx’s  economic  studies  to  build  his  brand 
of  “socialism.”  Stalin  was  not  closely  acquainted  with  any 
philosopher.  He  behaved  toward  Hegel  as  he  tvould  toward  a 
“dead  dog,”  attributing  to  him  the  “reaction  of  Prussian  ab¬ 
solutism  to  the  French  revolution.” 

But  Stalin  was  uncommonly  well  acquainted  with  Lenin.  He 
always  sought  support  in  him,  to  a  greater  extent  than  Lenin 
did  in  Marx.  Stalin  had  considerable  knotv’ledge  of  political 
history  only,  especially  Russian,  and  he  had  an  uncommonly 
good  memory. 

Stalin  really  did  not  need  any  more  than  this  for  his  role. 
Anything  that  did  not  coincide  with  his  needs  and  his  views, 
he  simply  proclaimed  as  “hostile”  and  forbade  it. 

The  three  men— Marx,  Lenin,  and  Stalin— are  contrasts  as 
men  and  are  contrasts  in  their  methods  of  expression.  In  addi¬ 
tion  to  being  a  revolutionary,  Marx  was  a  somewhat  simple 
scientist.  His  style  was  picturesque,  baroque,  unrestrained,  and 
witty  in  an  Olympian  sort  of  way.  Lenin  seemed  to  be  the 
incarnation  of  the  revolution  itself.  His  style  tvas  flamboyant, 
incisive,  and  logical.  Stalin  thought  his  power  lay  in  the  satis¬ 
faction  of  all  human  desires,  and  believed  his  thinking  to  be 
the  supreme  expression  of  human  thought.  His  style  tvas  color¬ 
less  and  monotonous,  but  its  oversimplified  logic  and  dogma¬ 
tism  tv’ere  convincing  to  the  conformists  and  to  common  people. 


TYRANNY  OVER  THE  MIND 


129 


It  contained  simplicities  from  the  writings  of  the  Church 
fathers,  not  so  much  the  result  of  his  religious  youth  as  the 
result  of  the  fact  that  his  was  the  way  of  expression  under 
primitive  conditions,  and  of  dogmatized  Communists. 

Stalin’s  followers  do  not  have  even  his  crude  internal  co¬ 
hesiveness  nor  his  dogmatic  powers  and  convictions.  Average 
men  in  everything,  they  possess  an  uncommonly  strong  sense  of 
reality.  Unable  to  generate  new  systems  or  new  ideas  because  of 
their  commitment  to  vital  bureaucratic  realities,  they  are  able 
only  to  stifle  or  make  impossible  the  creation  of  anything  new. 

Thus  is  the  evolution  of  the  dogmatic  and  exclusive  aspect  of 
Communist  ideology.  The  so-called  “further  development  of 
Marxism”  has  led  to  the  strengthening  of  the  new  class  and 
the  sovereignty  not  only  of  a  single  ideology,  but  the  sovereignty 
of  thought  of  a  single  man  or  group  of  oligarchs.  This  has 
resulted  in  the  intellectual  decline  and  impoverishment  of  the 
ideology  itself.  Along  with  this,  intolerance  of  other  ideas,  and 
even  of  human  thought  as  such,  has  increased.  The  ideology’s 
progress,  its  elements  of  truth,  have  declined  in  proportion  to 
the  increase  of  physical  power  of  its  disciples. 

Becoming  increasingly  one-sided  and  exclusive,  contempto- 
rary  Communism  more  and  more  creates  half-truths  and  tries 
to  justify  them.  At  first  sight,  it  seems  as  if  its  views,  individ¬ 
ually,  were  true.  But  it  is  incurably  infected  with  lies.  Its  half- 
truths  are  exaggerated  and  debased  to  the  p>oint  of  perversion; 
the  more  rigid  and  the  more  inspired  it  is  with  lies,  the  more 
it  strengthens  the  monopolism  of  its  leaders  over  society,  and 
thus  over  Communist  theory  itself. 


2. 


The  proposition  that  Marxism  is  a  universal  method,  a 
proposition  upon  which  Communists  are  obliged  to  stand,  must 
in  practice  lead  to  tyranny  in  all  areas  of  intellectual  activity. 


130  THE  NEW  CLASS 

What  can  the  unfortunate  physicists  do,  if  atoms  do  not 
behave  according  to  the  Hegelian-Marxist  struggle  or  according 
to  the  uniformity  of  opposites  and  their  development  into 
higher  forms?  What  of  the  astronomers,  if  the  cosmos  is  apa¬ 
thetic  to  Communist  dialectics?  What  of  the  biologists,  if  plants 
do  not  behave  according  to  the  Lysenko-Stalinist  theory  on  har¬ 
mony  and  cooperation  of  classes  in  a  “socialist”  society?  Because 
it  is  not  possible  for  these  scientists  to  lie  naturally,  they  must 
suffer  the  consequences  of  their  “heresies."  To  have  their  dis¬ 
coveries  accepted  they  must  make  discoveries  “confirming”  the 
formulas  of  Marxism-Leninism.  Scientists  are  in  a  constant 
dilemma  as  to  whether  their  ideas  and  discoveries  will  injure 
official  dogma.  They  are  therefore  forced  into  opportunism 
and  compromises  with  regard  to  science. 

The  same  is  true  of  other  intellectuals.  In  many  ways  con¬ 
temporary  Communism  is  reminiscent  of  the  exclusiveness  of 
religious  sects  of  the  Middle  Ages.  The  observations  on  Cal¬ 
vinism  written  by  the  Serbian  poet,  Jovan  Ducic,  in  his  Tuge 
i  vedrine  {Sorrows  and  Calms),  seem  to  relate  to  the  intellec¬ 
tual  atmosphere  in  a  Communist  country: 


.  .  .  And  this  Calvin,  jurist  and  dogmatician,  what  he  did 
not  burn  on  the  funeral  pyre,  he  hardened  in  the  soul  of  the 
people  of  Geneva.  He  introduced  religious  tribulation  and 
pious  renunciation  in  these  homes  which  are  even  today  filled 
with  this  cold  and  darkness;  planted  a  hatred  of  all  merriment 
and  rapture,  and  damned  poetry  and  music  by  decree.  As  a 
politician  and  tyrant  at  the  head  of  the  republic,  he  forged, 
like  shackles,  his  iron  laws  over  life  in  the  state,  and  even 
regulated  family  feelings.  Of  all  the  figures  which  the  Refor¬ 
mation  fostered,  Calvin  is  probably  the  most  calloused  of  the 
revolutionary  figures,  and  his  Bible  is  the  most  depressing 
textbook  for  living.  .  .  .  Calvin  was  not  a  new  Christian 
apostle  who  wished  to  restore  the  faith  to  its  pristine  purity, 
simplicity,  and  sweetness,  as  it  was  when  it  sprung  forth  from 
the  parabola  of  Nazareth.  This  Calvin  was  the  Aryan  ascetic, 
who,  severing  himself  from  the  regime,  also  severed  himself 


TYRANNY  OVER  THE  MIND 


131 


from  love,  the  basic  principle  of  his  dogma.  He  created  a 
people,  earnest  and  full  of  virtue,  but  also  full  of  hatred  of 
life  and  full  of  disbelief  in  happiness.  There  is  no  harsher 
religion  or  more  fearful  prophet.  Of  the  people  of  Geneva, 
Calvin  made  paralytics  forever  incapable  of  any  joy.  There 
are  no  people  in  the  world  to  whom  religion  has  brought  as 
much  tribulation  and  dreariness.  Calvin  was  an  eminent  re¬ 
ligious  writer,  as  important  to  the  purity  of  the  French  lan¬ 
guage  as  Luther  was  important  to  the  purity  of  the  German 
language,  the  translator  of  the  Bible.  But  he  was  also  the 
creator  of  a  theocracy  which  was  no  less  like  a  dictatorship 
than  was  the  Papal  monarchy.  While  announcing  that  he  was 
freeing  man’s  spiritual  personality,  he  degraded  man’s  civil 
personality  to  the  blackest  slavery.  He  confused  the  people 
and  failed  to  brighten  life  in  any  way.  He  changed  many 
things,  but  completed  nothing  and  contributed  nothing.  Al¬ 
most  300  years  after  Calvin,  in  Geneva,  Stendhal  observed 
how  young  men  and  young  women  carried  on  conversations 
only  about  "the  pastor"  and  his  last  sermon,  and  how  they 
knew  his  sermons  by  heart. 

Contemporary  Communism  also  contains  some  elements  of 
the  dogmatic  exclusiveness  of  the  Puritans  under  Cromwell  and 
of  the  political  intolerance  of  the  Jacobins.  But  there  are  essen¬ 
tial  differences.  The  Puritans  rigidly  believed  in  the  Bible  and 
the  Communists  believe  in  science.  Communist  power  is  more 
complete  than  that  of  the  Jacobins.  Further,  the  differences 
emanate  from  the  capabilities;  no  religion  or  dictatorship  has 
been  able  to  aspire  to  such  all-around  and  all-inclusive  power 
as  that  of  the  Communist  systems. 

The  conviction  of  the  Communist  leaders  that  they  were  on 
the  path  leading  to  the  creation  of  absolute  happiness  and  an 
ideal  society  grew  in  proportion  to  the  growth  of  their  power. 
It  has  been  said  in  jest  that  the  Communist  leaders  created  a 
Communist  society— for  themselves.  In  fact,  they  do  identify 
themselves  with  society  and  its  aspirations.  Absolute  despotism 
equates  itself  with  the  belief  in  absolute  human  happiness, 
though  it  is  an  all-inclusive  and  universal  tyranny. 


132 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


Progress  itself  has  transformed  the  Communist  power-wielders 
into  boosters  of  the  “human  consciousness.”  Their  concern  for 
human  consciousness  has  increased  as  their  power  has  increased, 
along  with  the  “building  of  socialism.” 

Yugoslavia  has  not  bypassed  this  evolution.  Some  of  the  Yugo¬ 
slav  leaders,  too,  stressed  the  “high  level  of  consciousness  of 
our  people”  during  the  revolutionary  period;  that  is,  while 
“our  people,”  or  some  of  them,  actively  supported  these  leaders. 
Now,  however,  the  “socialist”  consciousness  of  the  same  people, 
according  to  these  leaders,  is  very  low  and,  consequently,  must 
wait  for  democracy  in  order  to  be  raised.  Yugoslav  leaders 
openly  speak  of  the  fact  that  they  will  bestow  democracy  “when 
there  is  growth  of  socialist  consciousness”;  a  kind  of  conscious¬ 
ness  which  they  trust  will  automatically  be  attained  through 
industrialization.  Until  then,  these  theoreticians  of  a  democracy 
which  is  doled  out  in  small  doses,  men  who  practice  something 
entirely  contrary  to  democracy,  maintain  that  they  have  the 
right— in  the  name  of  future  happiness  and  freedom— to  prevent 
even  the  faintest  manifestations  of  ideas  or  of  any  consciousness 
which  is  unlike  theirs. 

Perhaps  only  in  the  beginning  were  Soviet  leaders  forced  to 
maneuver  with  such  shallow  promises  of  democracy  “in  the 
future.”  They  now  simply  maintain  that  this  freedom  has  al¬ 
ready  been  created  in  the  U.S.S.R.  Of  course,  even  they  sense 
that  freedom  is  at  work  under  them.  They  are  constantly  “ele¬ 
vating”  consciousness;  they  urge  men  to  “produce”;  they  cram 
minds  with  arid  Marxist  formulas  and  the  arid  political  views 
of  the  leaders.  Worse  still,  they  force  men  constantly  to  acknowl¬ 
edge  their  devotion  to  socialism  and  their  beliefs  in  the  infalli¬ 
bility  and  reality  of  the  promises  of  their  leaders. 

A  citizen  in  the  Communist  system  lives  oppressed  by  the 
constant  pangs  of  his  conscience,  and  the  fear  that  he  has  trans¬ 
gressed.  He  is  always  fearful  that  he  will  have  to  demonstrate 
that  he  is  not  an  enemy  of  socialism,  just  as  in  the  Middle  Ages 
a  man  constantly  had  to  show  his  devotion  to  the  Church. 


TYRANNY  OVER  THE  MIND 


133 


The  school  system  and  all  social  and  intellectual  activity 
work  toward  this  type  of  behavior.  From  birth  to  death  a  man 
is  surrounded  by  the  solicitude  of  the  ruling  party,  a  solicitude 
for  his  consciousness  and  conscience.  Journalists,  ideologists, 
paid  writers,  special  schools,  approved  ruling  ideas,  and  tremen¬ 
dous  material  means  are  all  enlisted  and  engaged  in  this  “uplift¬ 
ing  of  socialism.”  In  the  final  analysis,  all  newspapers  are 
official.  So  are  the  radio  and  other  similar  media. 

The  results  are  not  great.  In  no  case  are  they  proportionate 
to  the  means  and  measures  employed,  except  for  the  new  class 
which  would,  in  any  case,  be  convinced.  However,  considerable 
results  are  attained  in  making  it  impossible  to  manifest  a  con¬ 
sciousness  other  than  the  official  one,  and  in  combatting  op¬ 
posing  opinions. 

Even  under  Communism,  men  think,  for  they  cannot  help 
but  think.  What  is  more,  they  think  differently  from  the  pre¬ 
scribed  manner.  Their  thinking  has  two  faces— one  for  them¬ 
selves,  their  own;  the  other  for  the  public,  the  official. 

Even  in  Communist  systems,  men  are  not  so  stupefied  by  uni¬ 
form  propaganda  that  it  is  impossible  for  them  to  arrive  at  the 
truth  or  at  new  ideas.  In  the  intellectual  field,  however,  the 
plan  of  the  oligarchs  results  less  in  production  than  in  stag¬ 
nation,  corruption,  and  decay. 

These  oligarchs  and  soul-savers,  these  vigilant  protectors  who 
see  to  it  that  human  thought  does  not  drift  into  “criminal 
thought”  or  “anti-socialist  lines”;  these  unscrupulous  pro¬ 
curers  of  the  cheap  and  actually  the  only  available  consumer 
goods— these  holders  of  obsolete,  unchangeable,  and  immutable 
ideas— have  retarded  and  frozen  the  intellectual  impulses  of 
their  people.  They  have  thought  up  the  most  antihuman  ivords 
—“pluck  from  the  human  consciousness”— and  act  according  to 
these  words,  just  as  if  they  were  dealing  with  roots  and  weeds 
instead  of  man’s  thoughts.  By  stifling  the  consciousness  of 
others,  and  by  emasculating  human  intellect  so  that  it  cannot 
take  courage  and  soar,  they  themselves  become  gray,  barren  of 


134 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


ideas,  and  completely  lacking  in  the  intellectual  enthusiasm 
that  disinterested  meditation  inspires.  A  theater  without  an 
audience;  the  actors  play  and  go  into  raptures  over  themselves. 
They  think  as  automatically  as  they  eat;  their  brains  cook 
thoughts  in  response  to  the  most  elementary  needs.  This  is  how 
it  is  with  these  high  priests  who  are  simultaneously  policemen 
and  owners  of  all  the  media  which  the  human  intellect  can  use 
to  communicate  its  thoughts— press,  movies,  radio,  television, 
books,  and  the  like— as  well  as  of  all  substance  that  keeps  a 
human  being  alive— food  and  a  roof  over  his  head. 

Are  there  not  reasons  then  for  comparing  contemporary  Com¬ 
munism  with  religious  sects? 


3. 


Nevertheless,  every  Communist  country  achieves  technical 
progress,  even  though  of  a  special  kind  and  in  special  periods. 

Industrialization,  rapid  as  it  is,  creates  a  large  technical  in¬ 
telligentsia,  which,  even  if  it  is  not  especially  high  in  quality, 
attracts  talents  and  stimulates  the  inventive  intellect.  The  rea¬ 
sons  that  help  to  achieve  industrialization  rapidly  in  specific 
branches  of  the  economy  also  act  as  an  incentive  for  inventive¬ 
ness.  The  U.S.S.R.  has  not  lagged  to  any  extent  in  war  tech¬ 
nology  either  in  World  War  II  or  since.  The  U.S.S.R.  is  not 
far  behind  the  United  States  in  the  development  of  atomic 
energy.  Technology  is  advanced  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  a  bu¬ 
reaucratic  system  makes  it  difficult  to  adopt  innovations;  in¬ 
ventions  sometimes  lie  for  years  in  the  warehouses  of  state 
establishments.  The  disinterest  of  producing  organizations  often 
deadens  inventiveness  still  more. 

Being  very  practical  men,  the  Communist  leaders  immediately 
establish  cooperation  with  technicians  and  scientists,  not  pay¬ 
ing  much  attention  to  their  “bourgeois”  views.  It  is  clear  to  the 


TYRANNY  OVER  THE  MIND 


135 


leaders  that  industrialization  cannot  be  accomplished  without 
the  technical  intelligentsia,  and  that  this  intelligentsia  cannot 
by  itself  become  dangerous.  As  in  every  other  field.  Communists 
have  a  simplified  and  generally  half<orrect  theory  with  relation 
to  this  intelligentsia:  some  other  class  always  pays  the  special¬ 
ists,  while  they  serve  it.  Consequently,  why  shouldn’t  the  “pro¬ 
letariat,"  or  the  new  class,  also  do  this?  Acting  on  this  proposi¬ 
tion,  they  immediately  develop  a  system  of  wages. 

In  spite  of  their  technical  progress,  it  is  a  fact  that  no  great 
modem  scientific  discovery  has  been  achieved  under  the  Soviet 
government.  In  this  respect,  the  U.S.S.R.  is  probably  behind 
Czarist  Russia,  where  there  were  epochal  scientific  discoveries 
in  spite  of  technical  backwardness. 

Even  though  technical  reasons  make  scientific  discovery  dif¬ 
ficult,  the  main  reasons  for  this  difficulty  are  social.  The  new 
class  is  very  interested  in  seeing  that  its  ideological  monopolism 
is  not  endangered.  Every  great  scientific  discovery  is  the  result 
of  a  changed  view  of  the  world  in  the  mind  of  the  discoverer. 
A  new  view  does  not  fit  into  the  form  of  the  already  adopted 
official  philosophy.  In  the  Communist  system  every  scientist 
must  stop  short  before  this  fact  or  risk  being  proclaimed  a 
“heretic”  if  his  theories  do  not  coincide  with  the  confirmed, 
prescribed,  and  desirable  dogma. 

Work  on  discoveries  is  made  difficult  to  an  even  greater  de¬ 
gree  by  the  Imposition  of  the  official  view  that  Marxism,  or 
dialectical  materialism,  is  the  most  effective  method  for  all 
fields  of  scientific,  intellectual,  and  other  activity.  There  has 
not  been  a  single  noted  scientist  in  the  U.S.S.R.  who  has  not 
had  political  trouble.  There  have  been  many  reasons  for  this, 
but  one  is  due  to  opposition  to  the  official  line.  There  have 
been  fewer  occurrences  of  this  kind  in  Yugoslavia,  but  con¬ 
versely,  there  are  instances  of  the  favoring  of  “devoted”  but 
poor  scientists. 

Communist  systems  stimulate  technical  progress  but  also 
hinder  every  great  research  activity  where  undisturbed  func- 


136  THE  NEW  CLASS 

tioning  of  the  mind  is  necessary.  This  may  sound  contradictory, 
but  it  is  so. 

While  Communist  systems  are  only  relatively  opposed  to 
scientific  development,  they  are  absolutely  opposed  to  any  intel¬ 
lectual  progress  and  discovery.  Based  on  the  exclusiveness  of 
a  single  philosophy,  the  systems  are  expressly  anti-philosophic. 
In  such  systems,  there  has  not  been  bom,  nor  can  there  be 
bom,  a  single  thinker,  especially  a  social  thinker— as  long  as 
one  does  not  so  consider  the  jxiwer-wielders  themselves,  who 
are  generally  also  the  “main  philosophers”  and  masters  for 
"elevating”  the  human  consciousness.  In  Communism  a  new 
thought,  or  a  new  philosophy  and  social  theory,  must  travel  by 
very  indirect  roads,  generally  by  the  way  of  literature  or  some 
branch  of  art.  The  new  thought  must  first  hide  and  conceal 
itself  in  order  to  reach  the  light  and  begin  to  live. 

Of  all  the  sciences  and  all  thought,  social  sciences  and  the 
consideration  of  social  problems  fare  the  worst;  they  scarcely 
manage  to  exist.  When  it  is  a  question  of  society  or  of  a  social 
problem,  everything  is  interpreted  according  to  Marx  and 
Lenin,  or  everything  is  monopolized  by  the  leaders. 

History,  especially  of  its  own— the  Communist— period,  does 
not  exist.  Imposition  of  silence  and  falsification  are  not  only 
permitted  but  are  general  phenomena. 

The  intellectual  inheritance  of  the  people  is  also  being  con¬ 
fiscated.  The  monopolists  act  as  if  all  history  has  occurred  just 
to  let  them  make  their  appearance  in  the  world.  They  measure 
the  past  and  everything  in  it  by  their  own  likeness  and  form, 
and  apply  a  single  measure,  dividing  all  men  and  phenomena 
into  “progressive”  and  “reactionary”  classifications.  In  this 
fashion  they  raise  up  monuments.  They  elevate  the  pygmies 
and  destroy  the  great,  especially  the  great  of  their  own  time. 

Their  “single  scientific”  method  is  most  suitable  too  in  that 
it  alone  protects  and  justifies  their  exclusive  dominance  over 
science  and  society. 


TYRANNY  OVER  THE  MIND 


137 


4. 

Similar  things  are  happening  in  art.  Here  favors  are  ex¬ 
tended,  in  increasing  measure,  to  already  established  forms  and 
views  of  average  quality.  This  is  understandable:  there  is  no 
art  without  ideas,  or  without  some  effect  on  the  consciousness, 
hfonopoly  over  ideas,  the  formation  of  the  consciousness,  are 
the  prerequisites  of  the  rulers.  Communists  are  traditionalists 
in  art,  mostly  because  of  the  need  to  maintain  their  monopoly 
over  the  minds  of  the  people  but  also  because  of  their  ignorance 
and  one-sidedness.  Some  of  them  tolerate  a  kind  of  democratic 
freedom  in  modern  art;  but  this  is  only  an  acknowledgment  that 
they  do  not  understand  modern  art,  and  therefore  believe  that 
they  should  permit  it.  Lenin  felt  this  way  about  the  futurism 
of  Mayakovsky. 

In  spite  of  this,  backward  peoples  in  Communist  systems  ex¬ 
perience  a  cultural  renaissance  along  with  the  technical  one. 
Culture  becomes  more  accessible  to  them,  even  though  it  comes 
largely  in  the  form  of  propaganda.  The  new  class  is  interested 
in  the  spread  of  culture  because  industrialization  brings  the 
need  for  higher-quality  work  and  the  need  for  enlarging  intel¬ 
lectual  opportunities.  The  network  of  schools  and  professional 
branches  of  art  has  spread  very  rapidly,  sometimes  even  beyond 
actual  needs  and  capabilities.  Progress  in  art  is  undeniable. 

After  a  revolution,  before  the  ruling  class  has  established 
a  complete  monopoly,  significant  works  of  art  are  generally 
created.  This  was  true  in  the  U.S.S.R.  prior  to  the  1930’s:  it 
is  true  today  in  Yugoslavia.  It  is  as  if  the  revolution  had 
awakened  dormant  talents,  even  though  despotism,  which  is 
also  bom  in  the  revolution,  increasingly  stifles  art. 

The  two  basic  methods  of  stifling  the  arts  are  by  opposition 
toward  the  intellectual-idealistic  aspects  of  it  and  by  oppo¬ 
sition  to  innovations  in  form. 

In  Stalin’s  time  things  reached  the  point  where  all  forms 


138 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


of  artistic  expression  were  forbidden  except  those  that  Stalin 
himself  liked.  Stalin  did  not  have  particularly  good  taste;  he 
was  hard  of  hearing,  and  liked  octosyllabic  and  Alexandrine 
verse.  Deutscher  has  stated  that  Stalin’s  style  became  the  na¬ 
tional  style.  The  adoption  of  official  views  on  art  forms  became 
as  obligatory  as  the  adoption  of  official  ideas. 

It  has  not  always  been  like  this  in  Communist  systems,  nor 
is  it  inevitable  that  it  should  be  so.  In  1925,  in  the  U.S.S.R.,  a 
resolution  was  adopted  stating  that  “the  party  as  a  whole  can 
in  no  way  tie  devotion  to  a  cause  in  the  field  of  literary  form.” 
By  this  the  party  did  not  renounce  its  so-called  “ideological 
aid,”  that  is,  its  ideological  and  political  control  over  artists. 
This  was  the  maximum  democracy  attained  by  Communism 
in  the  field  of  art.  Yugoslav  leaders  are  in  the  same  position 
today.  After  1953,  when  the  abandonment  of  democratic  forms 
in  favor  of  bureaucracy  began,  the  most  primitive  and  reac¬ 
tionary  elements  were  encouraged;  a  mad  hunt  for  “petit  bour¬ 
geois”  intellectuals  was  initiated,  which  openly  aimed  at  con¬ 
trolling  art  forms.  Overnight,  the  whole  intellectual  world 
turned  against  the  regime.  Consequently,  the  regime  had  to 
retract,  announcing  through  one  of  Kardelj’s  speeches  that 
the  party  cannot  prescribe  form  itself,  but  that  it  would  not 
allow  “anti-socialist  ideological  contraband,”  that  is,  views 
which  the  regime  considered  as  being  “anti-socialist.”  The  Bol¬ 
shevik  parties  had  taken  this  stand  in  1925.  This  constituted 
the  “democratic”  limits  of  the  Yugoslav  regime  toward  art. 
However,  the  internal  attitudes  of  most  of  the  Yugoslav  leaders 
were  far  from  changed  by  this.  They  privately  consider  the 
entire  intellectual  and  art  world  as  “insecure,”  “petit  bour¬ 
geois,”  or,  putting  it  mildly,  “ideologically  confused.”  Cited 
in  Yugoslavia’s  greatest  newspaper  (Politika,  May  25,  1954) 
are  Tito’s  “unforgettable”  words:  “A  good  textbook  is  more 
valuable  than  any  novel.”  Periodic  hysterical  onslaughts  against 
“decadence,”  “destructive  ideas,”  and  “hostile  views”  in  art 
have  continued. 


TYRANNY  OVER  THE  MIND 


139 


Yugoslav  culture,  unlike  Soviet  culture,  has  at  least  succeeded 
in  concealing,  rather  than  destroying,  dissatisfied  and  turbulent 
opinions  regarding  art  forms.  This  has  never  been  possible 
for  Soviet  culture.  A  sword  hangs  over  Yugoslav  culture,  but 
the  sword  has  been  driven  into  the  heart  of  Soviet  culture. 

Relative  freedom  of  form,  which  the  Communists  can  only 
periodically  suppress,  cannot  completely  free  the  creative  per¬ 
son.  Art,  even  though  indirectly,  must  also  express  new  ideas 
through  form  itself.  Even  in  Communist  systems  where  art  is 
allowed  the  greatest  freedom,  the  contradiction  between  prom¬ 
ised  free  form  and  compulsory  control  of  ideas  remains 
unresolved.  This  contradiction  crops  out  from  time  to  time, 
sometimes  in  attacks  on  “contraband”  ideas,  sometimes  in  the 
work  of  artists  because  they  are  forced  to  use  particular  forms. 
It  crops  out  essentially  because  of  conflict  between  the  un¬ 
curbed  monopolistic  aspirations  of  the  regime  and  the  irresist¬ 
ible  creative  aspirations  of  the  artists.  It  is,  actually,  the  same 
conflict  which  exists  between  creativeness  in  science  and  Com¬ 
munist  dogmatism;  it  has  merely  been  carried  over  into  the 
field  of  art. 

Any  new  thought  or  idea  must  first  be  examined  in  essence, 
approved  or  disapproved,  and  fitted  into  a  harmless  frame. 
As  with  other  conflicts,  the  Communist  leaders  cannot  resolve 
this  one.  But  they  can,  as  we  have  seen,  periodically  extricate 
themselves,  usually  at  the  expense  of  real  freedom  of  artistic 
creation.  In  Communist  systems,  it  has  not  been  possible,  be¬ 
cause  of  this  contradiction,  to  develop  genuine  subjects  for  art 
or  to  develop  art  theory. 

A  work  of  art,  by  its  very  nature,  is  usually  a  criticism  of  a 
given  situation  and  of  given  relations.  In  Communist  systems, 
therefore,  artistic  creation  based  on  actual  subjects  is  not  pos¬ 
sible.  Only  praise  of  a  given  situation  or  criticism  of  the 
system’s  opponents  is  permitted.  Under  these  terms  art  can 
have  no  value  whatever. 

In  Yugoslavia  officials  and  some  artists  conplain  about  the  fact 


140  THE  NEW  CLASS 

that  there  are  no  works  of  art  which  can  show  "our  socialist 
reality.”  In  the  U.S.S.R.,  on  the  other  hand,  tons  of  works  of 
art  based  on  actual  subjects  are  created;  but  since  they  do  not 
reflect  the  truth,  they  do  not  have  any  value  and  are  rapidly 
rejected  by  the  public,  later  even  coining  under  official  criticism. 

The  method  is  varied  but  the  final  result  is  the  same. 


5. 


The  theory  of  so-called  "Socialist  Realism”  reigns  in  all 
Communist  states. 

In  Yugoslavia  this  theory  has  been  crushed  and  is  now  held 
only  by  the  most  reactionary  dogmatists.  In  this  area,  as  in 
others,  the  regime  has  been  strong  enough  to  forestall  the 
development  of  disagreeable  theories  but  has  been  too  weak 
to  impose  its  own  views.  It  can  be  said  that  the  same  goes  for 
the  other  East  European  countries. 

The  theory  of  “Socialist  Realism”  is  not  even  a  complete 
system.  Gorky  was  the  first  to  use  this  term,  probably  inspired 
by  his  realist  method.  His  views  were  that  in  rude  contemporary 
“socialist”  conditions,  art  must  be  inspired  with  new  or  socialist 
ideas  and  must  depict  reality  as  faithfully  as  possible.  Every¬ 
thing  else  that  this  theory  advocates— typicalness,  emphasis  on 
ideology,  party  solidarity,  etc.— has  either  been  taken  over  from 
other  theories  or  thrown  in  because  of  the  political  needs  of 
the  regime. 

Not  having  been  evolved  into  a  complete  theory,  “Socialist 
Realism”  actually  means  ideological  monopolism  by  Com¬ 
munists.  It  calls  for  efforts  to  clothe  the  narrow,  backward  ideas 
of  the  leaders  in  art  forms  and  for  their  works  to  be  depicted 
romantically  and  panegyrically.  This  has  led  to  a  Pharisaic 
justificaton  of  the  regime’s  control  over  ideas  and  to  bureau¬ 
cratic  censorship  of  the  needs  of  art  itself. 

The  forms  of  this  control  vary  in  different  Communist  coun- 


TYRANNY  OVER  THE  MIND 


141 


tries,  from  party-bureaucratic  censorship  to  ideological  influ¬ 
ence. 

Yugoslavia,  for  instance,  has  never  had  censorship.  Control 
is  exercised  indirectly  by  this  method:  in  publishing  enter¬ 
prises,  artist's  associations,  periodicals,  newspapers,  and  the 
like,  party  members  submit  everything  they  consider  “sus¬ 
picious”  to  the  proper  authorities.  Censorship,  or  really  self¬ 
censorship,  has  sprouted  from  that  very  atmosphere.  Even 
though  party  members  may  push  something  or  other  through, 
the  self-censorship  which  they  and  other  intellectuals  must  exer¬ 
cise  over  themselves  forces  them  to  dissemble  everything  and 
make  unworthy  insinuations.  But  this  is  considered  progress, 
it  is  “socialist  democracy,”  instead  of  bureaucratic  despotism. 

Neither  in  the  U.S.S.R.  nor  in  other  Communist  countries 
does  the  existence  of  censorship  absolve  creating  artists  from 
self-censorship.  Intellectuals  are  forced  into  self-censorship  by 
their  status  and  the  reality  of  social  relations.  Self-censorship 
is  actually  the  main  form  of  party  ideological  control  in  the 
Communist  system.  In  the  Middle  Ages  men  first  had  to  delve 
into  the  thought  of  the  Church  on  their  work;  in  the  same 
manner,  in  Communist  systems,  it  is  necessary  first  to  imagine 
what  kind  of  performance  is  expected  and,  often,  to  ascertain 
the  taste  of  the  leaders. 

Censorship,  or  self-censorship,  represents  itself  as  being 
“ideological  aid.”  In  the  same  way,  everything  in  Communism 
is  represented  as  being  devoted  to  the  implementation  of  ab¬ 
solute  happiness.  Consequently,  the  expressions  "the  people,” 
“the  working  people,”  and  similar  ones— in  spite  of  their 
vagueness— are  used  frequently  in  connection  with  the  arts. 

Persecutions,  prohibitions,  the  imposition  of  forms  and 
ideas,  humiliations,  and  insults;  the  doctrinaire  authority  of 
semi-literate  bureaucrats  over  geniuses;  all  this  is  done  in  the 
name  of  the  people  and  for  the  people.  Communist  “Socialist 
Realism”  is  not  different  even  in  terminology  from  Hitler’s 
National  Socialism.  A  Yugoslav  author  of  Hungarian  origin. 


142  the  new  class. 

Ervin  Sinko,  has  made  an  interesting  comparison  of  the  “art” 
theoreticians  in  the  two  dictatorships: 

Timofeyev,  the  Soviet  theorist,  wrote  in  his  Theory  of  Liter¬ 
ature:  “Literature  is  an  ideology  which  helps  man  to  get 
acquainted  with  life  and  to  realize  that  he  is  participating 
in  it.” 

“Fundamentals  of  National-Socialist  Cultural  Policy”  states: 
“An  artist  cannot  be  only  an  artist,  he  is  also  always  an  edu¬ 
cator.” 

Baldur  von  Schirach,  leader  of  the  Hitler  Youth,  stated: 
“Every  true  work  of  art  applies  to  the  entire  people." 

Zhdanov,  member  of  the  Politburo  of  the  Central  Commit¬ 
tee  of  the  Communist  Party  of  the  U.S.S.R.,  stated:  “Every¬ 
thing  that  is  creative  is  accessible.” 

In  “Fundamentals  ...”  Wolfgang  Schulz  stated:  “National- 
Socialist  policy,  even  that  part  of  it  which  is  called  cultural 
policy,  is  determined  by  the  Fiihrer  and  those  to  whom  he 
has  delegated  authority.” 

If  we  wish  to  know  what  National-Socialist  cultural  policy 
is,  we  must  look  to  these  men,  to  what  they  were  doing  and 
to  the  directives  they  issued  in  order  to  educate  responsible 
associates  for  themselves. 

At  the  Eighteenth  Congress  of  the  Communist  Party  of  the 
U.S.S.R.,  Yaroslavsky  said:  “Comrade  Stalin  inspires  artists; 
he  gives  them  guiding  ideas.  .  .  .  The  resolutions  of  the  Cen¬ 
tral  Committee  of  the  Soviet  Communist  Party  and  the  report 
of  A.  A.  Zhdanov  give  Soviet  writers  a  completely  prepared 
work  program.” 

Despotisms,  even  when  they  are  opposing  ones,  justify  them¬ 
selves  in  the  same  way;  they  cannot  even  avoid  the  use  of  the 
same  words  in  doing  so. 


6. 


An  enemy  to  thought  in  the  name  of  science,  an  enemy  to 
freedom  in  the  name  of  democracy,  the  Communist  oligarchy 
cannot  but  accomplish  complete  corruption  of  the  mind.  Capi- 


TYRANNY  OVER  THE  MIND 


143 


talist  magnates  and  feudal  lords  used  to  pay  artists  and  scientists 
as  they  could  and  wished,  and  thus  both  aided  and  corrupted 
them.  In  Communist  systems,  corruption  is  an  integral  part 
of  state  policy. 

The  Communist  system,  as  a  rule,  stifles  and  represses  any 
intellectual  activity  with  which  it  does  not  agree;  that  is,  every¬ 
thing  that  is  profound  and  original.  On  the  other  hand,  it 
rewards  and  encourages,  and  actually  corrupts,  all  that  it  thinks 
will  benefit  “socialism,”  that  is,  the  system  itself. 

Even  overlooking  such  concealed  and  drastic  means  of  cor¬ 
ruptions  as  “Stalin  prizes,”  the  use  of  personal  ties  with  the 
powers-that-be,  and  the  capricious  demands  and  purchases  of 
the  top  bureaucrats— all  of  which  represent  extremes  of  the 
system— the  fact  remains  that  the  system  itself  corrupts  intel¬ 
lectuals  and,  especially,  art.  Direct  rewards  from  the  regime 
may  be  abolished,  just  as  censorship  may  be,  but  the  spirit  of 
corruption  and  oppression  remains. 

This  spirit  is  established  and  stimulated  by  party-bureau¬ 
cratic  monopolism  over  materials  and  mind.  The  intellectual 
has  nowhere  to  turn  except  toward  this  power,  whether  for 
ideas  or  for  profit.  Even  though  this  power  may  not  be  directly 
the  government’s,  it  extends  through  all  establishments  and 
organizations.  In  the  final  analysis  it  makes  the  decisions. 

It  is  very  important  to  the  artist  that  restraint  and  centralism 
be  exercised  as  little  as  possible,  even  though  the  essence  of 
his  social  position  is  not  thereby  changed.  Because  of  this,  it 
is  much  easier  for  him  to  work  and  live  in  Yugoslavia  than  in 
the  U.S.S.R. 

An  oppressed  human  mind  is  forced  to  submit  to  corruption. 
If  one  seeks  to  know  why  for  a  quarter  of  a  century  there  have 
been  scarcely  any  significant  works,  especially  in  literature, 
in  the  U.S.S.R.,  he  would  find  that  corruption  has  played  as 
great  or  greater  a  part  than  oppression  in  causing  this  scarcity. 

The  Communist  system  persecutes,  suspects,  and  prods  into 
self<riticism  its  really  creative  people.  It  offers  its  sycophants 


144 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


attractive  "working  conditions”  and  lavish  honorariums,  re¬ 
wards,  villas,  vacation  centers,  discounts,  automobiles,  ambas¬ 
sadorial  mandates,  agit-prop  protections,  and  “magnanimous 
interventions.”  Thus,  as  a  rule,  it  favors  the  untalented, 
dependent,  and  non-inventive.  It  is  understandable  that  the 
greatest  minds  have  lost  their  direction,  faith,  and  power.  Sui¬ 
cide,  despair,  alcoholism,  and  debauchery,  the  loss  of  internal 
powers  and  integrity  because  the  artist  is  forced  to  lie  to  himself 
and  others— these  are  the  most  frequent  phenomena  in  the 
Communist  system  among  those  who  actually  wish  to,  and  could 
create. 


7. 

It  is  generally  thought  that  Communist  dictatorship  practices 
brutal  class  discrimination.  This  is  not  completely  accurate. 
Historically,  class  discrimination  declines  as  the  revolution 
slackens  off,  but  ideological  discrimination  increases.  The  illu¬ 
sion  that  the  proletariat  is  in  power  is  inaccurate;  so,  too, 
is  the  proposition  that  Communists  persecute  someone  because 
he  is  a  bourgeois.  Their  measures  do  aim  most  harshly  at  the 
members  of  the  ruling  classes,  especially  the  bourgeoisie.  But 
those  bourgeois  who  capitulate,  or  reorient  themselves,  are  able 
to  assure  for  themselves  lucrative  posts  and  favor.  ^Vhat  is 
more,  the  secret  police  often  find  able  agents  in  their  ranks, 
while  the  new  power-wielders  find  them  able  servants.  Only 
those  who  do  not  ideologically  approve  the  Communist  meas¬ 
ures  and  views  are  punished  without  consideration  as  to  their 
class  or  their  attitude  toward  nationalization  of  capitalist 
property. 

Persecution  of  democratic  and  socialist  thought  which  is  at 
variance  with  that  of  the  ruling  oligarchy  is  fiercer  and  more 
complete  than  persecution  of  the  most  reactionary  followers 


TYRANNY  OVER  THE  MIND  145 

of  the  fonner  regime.  This  is  understandable;  the  last  named 
are  less  dangerous  since  they  look  to  a  past  which  has  little 
likelihood  of  returning  and  reconquering. 

Whenever  Communists  come  to  ptower,  their  assault  on  pri¬ 
vate  ownership  creates  the  illusion  that  their  measures  are 
primarily  directed  against  the  ownership  classes  for  the  benefit 
of  the  working  class.  Subsequent  events  prove  that  their  meas¬ 
ures  were  not  taken  for  this  purpose  but  in  order  to  establish 
their  own  ownership.  This  must  manifest  itself  predominantly 
as  ideological  rather  than  class  discrimination.  If  this  were  not 
true,  if  they  really  strove  for  actual  ownership  by  the  working 
masses,  then  class  discrimination  actually  would  have  prevailed. 

The  fact  that  ideological  discrimination  prevails  leads,  at 
first  sight,  to  the  conclusion  that  a  new  religious  sect  has  risen, 
a  sect  which  rigidly  sticks  to  its  materialistic  and  atheistic  pre¬ 
scriptions  and  forcibly  imposes  them  on  others.  Communists  do 
behave  like  a  religious  sect  even  though  they  are  not  really  one. 

This  totalitarian  ideology  is  not  only  the  result  of  certain 
forms  of  government  and  of  ownership.  For  its  part,  the  ide¬ 
ology  aided  in  their  creation  and  supports  them  in  every 
way.  Ideological  discrimination  is  a  condition  for  the  continu¬ 
ance  of  the  Communist  system. 

It  would  be  wrong  to  think  that  other  forms  of  discrimina¬ 
tion-race,  caste,  national— are  worse  than  ideological  discrimi¬ 
nation.  They  may  seem  more  brutal  to  all  outward  appearances, 
but  they  are  not  as  refined  or  complete.  They  aim  at  the 
activities  of  society,  while  ideological  discrimination  aims  at 
society  as  a  whole,  and  at  every  individual.  Other  types  of  dis¬ 
crimination  may  crush  a  human  being  physically,  while  ideo¬ 
logical  discrimination  strikes  at  the  very  thing  in  the  human 
being  which  is  perhaps  most  peculiarly  his  own.  Tyranny  over 
the  mind  is  the  most  complete  and  most  brutal  type  of  tyranny; 
every  other  tyranny  begins  and  ends  with  it. 

On  the  one  hand  the  ideological  discrimination  in  Commu- 


146 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


nist  systems  aims  at  prohibiting  other  ideas:  on  the  other,  at 
imposing  exclusively  its  own  ideas.  These  are  two  most  strik¬ 
ing  forms  of  unbelievable,  total  tyranny. 

Thought  is  the  most  creative  force.  It  uncovers  what  is  new. 
Men  can  neither  live  nor  produce  if  they  do  not  think  or  con¬ 
template.  Even  though  they  may  deny  it.  Communists  are 
forced  to  accept  this  fact  in  practice.  Thus  they  make  it  impos¬ 
sible  for  any  thought  other  than  their  own  to  prevail. 

Man  may  renounce  much.  But  he  must  think  and  he  has  a 
deep  need  to  express  his  thoughts.  It  is  profoundly  sickening  to 
be  compelled  to  remain  silent  when  there  is  need  for  expres¬ 
sion.  It  is  tyranny  at  its  worst  to  compel  men  not  to  think  as 
they  do,  to  compel  men  to  express  thoughts  that  are  not  their 
own. 

The  limitation  of  freedom  of  thought  is  not  only  an  attack 
on  specific  political  and  social  rights,  but  an  attack  on  the 
human  being  as  such.  Man’s  imperishable  aspirations  for  free¬ 
dom  of  thought  always  emerge  in  concrete  from.  If  they  have 
not  yet  become  apparent  in  Communist  systems,  this  does  not 
mean  that  they  do  not  exist.  Today  they  lie  in  dark  and  apa¬ 
thetic  resistance,  and  in  the  unshapen  hopes  of  the  people.  It 
is  as  if  totality  of  oppression  were  erasing  differences  in  national 
strata,  uniting  all  people  in  the  demand  for  freedom  of  thought 
and  for  freedom  in  general. 

History  will  pardon  Communists  for  much,  establishing  that 
they  were  forced  into  many  brutal  acts  because  of  circumstances 
and  the  need  to  defend  their  existence.  But  the  stifling  of  every 
divergent  thought,  the  exclusive  monopoly  over  thinking  for 
the  purpose  of  defending  their  personal  interests,  will  nail  the 
Communists  to  a  cross  of  shame  in  history. 


The  Aim  and  The  Means 


1. 


All  revolutions  and  all  revolutionaries  use  oppressive  and 
unscrupulous  means  in  abundance. 

However,  earlier  revolutionaries  were  not  as  conscious  of 
their  methods  as  the  Communists  have  been.  They  were  unable 
to  adapt  and  use  their  methods  to  the  degree  that  the  Com¬ 
munists  have  done. 

“You  don’t  need  to  pick  and  choose  the  means  to  use  against 
enemies  of  the  movement.  .  .  .  You  must  punish  not  only  the 
traitors,  but  also  the  indifferent;  you  must  punish  all  who  are 
inactive  in  the  republic,  all  who  do  nothing  for  it.” 

These  words  of  Saint-Just  might  have  been  uttered  by  some 
Communist  leader  of  today.  But  Saint-Just  flung  them  out  in 
the  heat  of  the  revolution,  to  preserve  its  destiny.  The  Commu¬ 
nists  speak  these  words  and  act  according  to  them  constantly— 
from  the  beginning  of  their  revolution  until  they  reach  com¬ 
plete  power,  and  even  in  their  decline. 

Although  Communist  methods  surpass  any  of  those  of  other 
revolutionaries  in  range,  duration,  and  severity,  during  a  revo¬ 
lution  the  Communists  have  not  as  a  rule  used  all  the  means 
that  their  antagonists  used.  However,  even  though  the  methods 
of  the  Communists  might  have  been  less  bloody,  they  became 


147 


148  THE  NEW  CLASS 

increasingly  more  inhumane  the  farther  away  they  got  from 
the  revolution. 

Like  every  social  and  political  movement.  Communism  must 
use  methods  primarily  suited  to  the  interests  and  relations  of 
the  powers-that-be.  Other  considerations,  including  moral  ones, 
are  subordinated. 

Here,  we  are  interested  only  in  the  methods  used  by  con¬ 
temporary  Communism,  which  may,  according  to  conditions, 
be  mild  or  severe,  human  or  inhuman,  but  which  are  different 
from  those  used  by  other  political  and  social  movements  and 
distinguish  Communism  from  other  movements,  revolutionary 
or  not. 

This  distinction  does  not  lie  in  the  fact  that  Communist 
methods  are  perhaps  the  most  brutal  ones  recorded  in  history. 
It  is  true  that  brutality  is  their  most  obvious  but  not  their 
most  intrinsic  aspect.  A  movement  which  had  as  its  aim  the 
transformation  of  the  economy  and  of  society  by  means  of 
tyranny  had  to  resort  to  brutal  methods.  But  all  other  revolu¬ 
tionary  movements  had  and  wanted  to  use  the  same  methods. 
Yet,  the  fact  that  their  tyranny  was  of  shorter  duration  was  the 
reason  that  they  could  not  use  all  these  methods.  In  addition, 
their  oppression  could  not  be  as  total  as  that  of  the  Commu¬ 
nists,  because  it  came  about  under  circumstances  which  did  not 
permit  it  to  be  as  total. 

It  would  be  even  less  justifiable  to  seek  the  reasons  for  Com¬ 
munist  methods  in  the  fact  that  Communists  lack  ethical  or 
moral  principles.  Except  for  the  fact  that  they  are  Communists, 
they  are  men  like  all  others  who  in  relationships  among  them¬ 
selves  abide  by  the  moral  principles  customary  in  human 
societies.  Lack  of  ethics  among  them  is  not  the  reason  for  their 
methods  but  the  result  of  them.  In  principles  and  in  words. 
Communists  subscribe  to  ethical  precepts  and  humane  methods. 
They  belive  that  they  are  “temporarily”  forced  to  resort  to 
something  contrary  to  their  ethical  views.  Communists  too 
think  that  it  would  be  much  better  if  they  did  not  have  to  act 


THE  AIM  AND  THE  MEANS 


149 


contrary  to  their  ethical  views.  In  this  they  are  not  much  dif¬ 
ferent  from  participants  in  other  political  movements,  except 
that  they  have  divorced  themselves  from  humanity  in  a  more 
permanent  and  monstrous  form. 

Numerous  features  which  distinguish  contemporary  Com¬ 
munism  from  other  movements  in  the  use  of  methods  can  be 
found.  These  features  are  predominantly  quantitative  or  are 
actuated  by  varied  historical  conditions  and  by  the  aims  of 
Communists. 

However,  there  is  an  integral  feature  of  contemporary  Com¬ 
munism  which  distinguishes  its  methods  from  those  of  other 
political  movements.  At  first  sight  this  feature  might  seem 
similar  to  features  of  some  churches  in  the  past.  It  stems  from 
the  idealistic  aims  which  the  Communists  will  use  any  means 
to  further.  These  means  have  become  increasingly  reckless  as 
the  aims  became  unrealizable.  The  use  of  their  methods,  even 
for  the  attainment  of  idealistic  aims,  cannot  be  justified  by  any 
moral  principle.  Their  use  brands  those  who  use  them  as  un¬ 
scrupulous  and  merciless  power-wielders.  The  former  classes, 
parties,  and  forms  of  ownership  no  longer  exist  or  have  been 
incapacitated,  yet  methods  have  not  been  changed  essentially. 
Indeed,  these  methods  are  just  now  achieving  their  full  measure 
of  inhumanity. 

As  the  new  exploiting  class  climbs  to  power,  it  tries  to 
justify  its  non-idealistic  methods  by  invoking  its  idealistic  aims. 
The  inhumanity  of  Stalin’s  methods  reached  its  greatest  height 
when  he  built  a  “socialist  society.”  Because  the  new  class  must 
show  that  its  interests  are  exclusively  and  ideally  the  aim  of 
society  and  because  it  must  maintain  intellectual  and  every 
other  type  of  monopoly,  the  new  class  must  proclaim  that  the 
methods  it  uses  are  not  important.  The  end  is  important, 
shout  its  representatives,  everything  else  is  trifling.  What  is 
important  is  that  we  now  “have”  socialism.  So  do  the  Commu¬ 
nists  justify  tyranny,  baseness,  and  crime. 

Of  course,  the  end  must  be  assured  by  special  instruments— 


150 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


by  the  party.  It  becomes  something  dominant  and  supreme  unto 
itself,  like  the  Church  in  the  Middle  Ages.  To  quote  Dietrich 
von  Nieheim,  nominal  Bishop  of  Verden,  writing  in  1411: 

“When  its  existence  is  threatened,  the  church  is  freed  of 
moral  edicts.  Unity  as  an  aim  blesses  all  means:  perfidy,  treach¬ 
ery,  tyranny,  simony,  prisons,  and  death.  For  every  holy  order 
exists  because  of  the  aims  of  society,  and  personality  must  be 
sacrificed  to  the  general  good.” 

These  words,  too,  sound  as  if  they  had  been  uttered  by  some 
contemporary  Communist. 

There  is  much  of  the  feudal  and  fanatic  in  the  dogmatism 
of  contemporary  Communism.  But  neither  are  we  living  in 
the  Middle  Ages  nor  is  contemporary  Communism  a  church. 
The  emphasis  on  ideological  and  other  monopolism  only  seems 
to  make  contemporary  Communism  similar  to  the  medieval 
Church;  the  essence  of  each  is  different.  The  Church  was  only 
partly  owner  and  governor;  in  the  most  extreme  cases,  it 
aspired  to  perpetuate  a  given  social  system  through  absolute 
control  of  the  mind.  The  churches  persecuted  heretics,  even 
for  dogmatic  reasons  which  were  not  always  called  for  by 
direct  practical  needs.  As  the  Church  represented  it,  it  was 
attempting  to  save  sinful,  heretical  souls  by  destroying  their 
bodies.  All  earthly  means  were  considered  permissible  for  the 
purpose  of  attaining  the  heavenly  kingdom. 

But  the  Communists  first  of  all  desire  physical  or  state  au¬ 
thority.  Intellectual  control  and  persecution  exercised  for  dog¬ 
matic  reasons  are  only  auxiliary  aids  for  strengthening  the 
power  of  the  state.  Unlike  the  Church,  Communism  is  not  the 
support  of  the  system  but  its  embodiment. 

The  new  class  did  not  arise  suddenly,  but  was  developed  from 
a  revolutionary  to  an  ownership  and  reactionary  group.  Its 
methods  too,  even  though  they  seemed  the  same,  changed  in 
essence  from  revolutionary  ones  to  tyrannical  ones,  from  pro¬ 
tective  to  despotic  ones. 

Communist  methods  will  in  essence  be  amoral  and  un- 


THE  AIM  AND  THE  MEANS 


151 


scrupulous,  even,  when  they  are  especially  severe  in  form. 
Because  it  is  completely  totalitarian.  Communist  rule  cannot 
allow  for  much  choice  of  means.  And  Communists  are  incapa¬ 
ble  of  renouncing  the  essential  thing— the  lack  of  choice  of 
means— because  of  the  fact  that  they  want  to  retain  absolute 
power  and  their  own  egotistical  interests. 

Even  if  they  did  not  so  wish.  Communists  must  be  both 
owners  and  despots  and  must  utilize  many  means  for  that  pur¬ 
pose.  In  spite  of  any  happy  theories  or  good  inclinations  they 
might  have,  the  system  itself  drives  them  to  the  utilization  of 
any  means.  In  case  of  any  urgency,  they  find  themselves  the 
moral  and  intellectual  champions  and  the  actual  users  of  any 
means  available. 


2. 


Communists  speak  of  "Communist  morale,”  “the  new  So¬ 
cialist  man,”  and  similar  concepts  as  if  they  were  speaking  of 
some  higher  ethical  categories.  These  hazy  concepts  have  only 
one  practical  meaning— the  cementing  of  Communist  ranks  and 
opposition  to  foreign  influence.  As  actual  ethical  categories, 
however,  they  do  not  exist. 

Since  no  special  Communist  ethics  nor  a  Socialist  Man  can 
emerge,  the  caste  spirit  of  the  Communists,  and  special  moral 
and  other  concepts,  which  they  nurse  among  themselves,  are 
are  all  the  more  strongly  developed.  These  are  not  absolute 
principles,  but  changing  moral  standards.  They  are  embedded 
in  the  Communist  hierarchical  system  in  which  almost  any¬ 
thing  is  permitted  at  the  top— the  upper  circles— while  the  same 
things  are  condemned  if  they  are  practiced  at  lower  echelons— 
the  lower  circles. 

This  caste  spirit  and  these  morals,  changeable  and  incom¬ 
plete,  have  undergone  a  long  and  varied  development,  and 
have  even  often  been  the  stimulus  for  the  further  development 


152 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


of  the  new  class.  The  end  result  of  this  development  has  been 
the  creation  of  special  sets  of  moral  standards  for  various  castes, 
always  subordinated  to  the  practical  needs  of  the  oligarchy. 
The  formation  of  these  caste  morals  roughly  corresponds  to  the 
rise  of  the  new  class  and  is  identical  with  its  abandonment  of 
humane,  really  ethical  standards. 

These  propositions  require  detailed  exposition. 

Like  all  other  aspects  of  Communism,  caste  morals  developed 
from  revolutionary  morals.  At  first,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that 
they  were  a  part  of  an  isolated  movement,  these  morals  were 
proclaimed  as  being  more  humane  than  those  of  any  sect  or 
caste.  But  a  Communist  movement  always  begins  as  one  of 
highest  idealism  and  most  selfless  sacrifice,  attracting  into  iu 
ranks  the  most  gifted,  the  bravest,  and  even  the  most  noble 
intellects  of  the  nation. 

This  statement,  just  as  most  of  the  others  made  here,  relate^ 
to  countries  in  which  Communism  has  developed  for  the  most 
part  because  of  national  conditions,  and  where  it  has  attained 
full  power  (Russia,  Yugoslavia,  and  China) .  However,  with 
some  modifications  this  statement  also  applies  to  Communism 
in  other  countries. 

Everywhere,  Communism  begins  as  an  aspiration  toward  a 
beautiful  ideal  society.  As  such,  it  attracts  and  inspires  men 
of  high  moral  standards  and  of  other  high  distinction.  But 
since  Communism  is  also  an  international  movement,  it  turns, 
like  a  sunflower  to  the  sun,  to  the  movement  which  is  strongest 
—until  now  primarily  in  the  U.S.S.R.  Consequently,  even  the 
Communists  of  other  countries  where  they  are  not  in  power 
rapidly  lose  the  features  they  had  in  the  beginning  and  take 
on  those  of  the  power-wielding  Communism.  As  a  result,  the 
Communist  leaders  in  the  West,  and  in  other  places,  have  ac¬ 
customed  themselves  to  play  as  easily  with  the  truth  and  ethical 
principles  as  the  Communists  in  the  U.S.S.R.  Every  Communist 
movement  at  first  also  has  high  moral  features  which  isolated 
individuals  may  retain  even  longer  and  which  provoke  crises 


THE  AIM  AND  THE  MEANS 


153 


when  leaders  initiate  amoral  proceedings  and  arbitrary  turn¬ 
abouts. 

History  does  not  have  many  movements  that,  like  Com¬ 
munism,  began  their  climb  with  such  high  moral  prinicples 
and  with  such  devoted,  enthusiastic,  and  clever  fighters,  at¬ 
tached  to  each  other  not  only  by  ideas  and  suffering,  but  also  by 
selfless  love,  comradeship,  solidarity,  and  that  warm  and  direct 
sincerity  that  can  be  produced  only  by  battles  in  which  men  are 
doomed  either  to  win  or  die.  Cooperative  efforts,  thoughts,  and 
desires:  even  the  most  intense  effort  to  attain  the  same  method 
of  thinking  and  feeling,  the  finding  of  personal  happiness  and 
the  building  of  individuality  through  complete  devotion  to 
the  party  and  workers’  collective:  enthusiastic  sacrificing  for 
others:  care  and  protection  for  the  young,  and  tender  respect 
for  the  old— these  are  the  ideals  of  true  Communists  when  the 
movement  is  in  its  inception  and  still  truly  Communist. 

Communist  woman  too  is  more  than  a  comrade  or  co-fighter. 
It  can  never  be  forgotten  that  she,  on  entering  the  movement, 
decided  to  sacrifice  all— the  happiness  of  both  love  and  of 
motherhood.  Between  men  and  women  in  the  movement,  a 
clean,  modest  and  warm  relationship  is  fostered:  a  relationship 
in  which  comradely  care  has  become  sexless  passion.  Loyalty, 
mutual  aid,  frankness  about  even  the  most  intimate  thoughts— 
these  are  generally  the  ideals  of  true,  ideal  Communists. 

This  is  true  only  while  the  movement  is  young,  before  it  has 
tasted  the  fruits  of  power. 

The  road  to  the  attainment  of  these  ideals  is  very  long  and 
difficult.  Communists  and  Communist  movements  are  formed 
from  varied  social  forces  and  centers.  Internal  homogeneity  is 
not  attained  overnight,  but  through  the  fierce  battles  of  varied 
groups  and  fractions.  If  conditions  are  favorable,  the  group 
or  fraction  which  wins  the  battle  is  the  one  which  has  been 
most  aware  of  the  advance  toward  Communism  and  which, 
when  taking  over  power,  is  also  the  most  moral.  Through 
moral  crises,  through  political  intrigues  and  insinuations,  mu- 


154  THE  NEW  CLASS 

tual  calumniation,  unreasoning  hatred  and  barbaric  encounters, 
through  debauchery  and  intellectual  decadence,  the  movement 
slowly  climbs,  crushing  groups  and  individuals,  discarding  the 
superfluous,  forging  its  core  and  its  dogma,  its  morals  and 
psychology,  atmosphere,  and  manner  of  work. 

When  it  becomes  truly  revolutionary,  the  Communist  move¬ 
ment  and  its  followers  achieve,  for  a  moment,  the  high  moral 
standards  described  here.  This  is  a  moment  in  Communism 
when  it  is  difficult  to  separate  words  from  deeds,  or  more  ac¬ 
curately,  when  the  leading,  most  important,  truest,  and  ideal 
Communists  sincerely  believe  in  their  ideals  and  aspire  to  put 
them  into  practice  in  their  methods  and  in  their  personal  life. 
This  is  the  moment  on  the  eve  of  the  battle  for  power,  a  mo¬ 
ment  which  occurs  only  in  movements  which  arrive  at  this 
unique  point. 

True,  these  are  the  morals  of  a  sect,  but  they  are  morals  on 
a  high  plane.  The  movement  is  isolated,  it  often  does  not  see 
the  truth,  but  this  does  not  mean  that  the  movement  does  not 
therefore  aim  at,  or  that  it  does  not  love,  truth. 

Internal  moral  and  intellectual  fusion  are  the  result  of  a 
long  battle  for  ideological  and  operational  unity.  Without  this 
fusion  there  cannot  even  be  any  thought  of  a  true  revolutionary 
Communist  movement.  “Unity  of  mind  and  action”  is  im¬ 
possible  without  psychic-moral  unity.  And  vice  versa.  But  this 
very  psychic  and  moral  unity— for  which  no  statutes  or  laws 
have  been  written,  but  which  occurs  spontaneously,  to  become 
a  custom  and  a  conscious  habit— more  than  anything  else  makes 
Communists  that  indestructible  family,  incomprehensible  and 
impenetrable  to  others,  inflexible  in  the  solidarity  and  identity 
of  its  reactions,  thoughts,  and  feelings.  More  than  anything 
else,  the  existence  of  this  psychic-moral  unity— which  is  not 
attained  all  at  once  and  which  is  not  even  finally  formed  ex 
cept  as  something  to  aspire  to— is  the  most  reliable  sign  that 
the  Communist  movement  has  established  itself  and  has  become 
irresistible  to  its  followers  and  to  many  others,  powerful  be- 


155 


THE  AIM  AND  THE  MEANS 

cause  it  is  fused  into  one  piece,  one  soul,  and  one  body.  This 
is  the  proof  that  a  new,  homogeneous  movement  has  emerged, 
a  movement  facing  a  future  completely  different  from  the  fu¬ 
ture  which  the  movement  foresaw  at  the  beginning. 

However,  all  this  slowly  fades,  disintegrates,  and  drowns 
during  the  course  of  the  climb  to  complete  power  and  to  owner¬ 
ship  by  the  Communists.  Only  the  bare  forms  and  observances 
which  have  no  real  substance  remain. 

The  internal  monolithic  cohesion  which  was  created  in  the 
struggle  with  the  oppositionists  and  with  the  half-Communist 
groups  is  transformed  into  a  unity  of  obedient  counselors  and 
robot-bureaucrats  inside  the  movement.  During  the  climb  to 
power,  intolerance,  servility,  incomplete  thinking,  control  of 
personal  life— which  once  was  comradely  aid  but  is  now  a  form 
of  oligarchic  management— hierarchical  rigidity  and  introver¬ 
sion,  the  nominal  and  neglected  role  of  women,  opportunism, 
self-centeredness,  and  outrage  repress  the  once-existent  high 
principles.  The  wonderful  human  characteristics  of  an  isolated 
movement  are  slowly  transformed  into  the  intolerant  and 
Pharisaical  morals  of  a  privileged  caste.  Thus,  politicking  and 
servility  replace  the  former  straightforwardness  of  the  revolu¬ 
tion.  Where  the  former  heroes  who  were  ready  to  sacrifice 
everything,  including  life,  for  others  and  for  an  idea,  for  the 
good  of  the  people,  have  not  been  killed  or  pushed  aside,  they 
become  self-centered  cowards  without  ideas  or  comrades,  willing 
to  renounce  everything— honor,  name,  truth,  and  morals— in 
order  to  keep  their  place  in  the  ruling  class  and  the  hierachical 
circle.  The  world  has  seen  few  heroes  as  ready  to  sacrifice  and 
suffer  as  the  Communists  were  on  the  eve  of  and  during  the 
revolution.  It  has  probably  never  seen  such  characterless 
wretches  and  stupid  defenders  of  arid  formulas  as  they  become 
after  attaining  power.  Wonderful  human  features  were  the 
condition  for  creating  and  attracting  power  for  the  movement: 
exclusive  caste  spirit  and  complete  lack  of  ethical  principles 
and  virtues  have  become  conditions  for  the  power  and  main- 


156 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


tenance  of  the  movement.  Honor,  sincerity,  sacrific,  and  love 
of  the  truth  were  once  things  that  could  be  understood  for 
their  own  sakes;  now,  deliberate  lies,  sycophancy,  slander,  de¬ 
ception,  and  provocation  gradually  become  the  inevitable 
attendants  of  the  dark,  intolerant,  and  all-inclusive  might  of 
the  new  class,  and  even  affect  relations  between  the  members 
of  the  class. 


3. 

Whoever  has  not  grasped  this  dialectic  of  the  development 
of  Communism  has  not  been  able  to  understand  the  so-called 
Moscow  trials.  Nor  can  he  understand  why  the  Communists’ 
periodic  moral  crises,  caused  by  the  abandonment  of  the  sacred 
and  consecrated  principles  of  the  day  before  yesterday,  cannot 
have  the  great  significance  that  such  crises  have  for  ordinary 
people  or  other  movements. 

Khrushchev  acknowledged  that  truncheons  played  the  main 
role  in  the  “confessions”  and  the  self-condemnation  of  Stalin’s 
purges.  He  claimed  that  drugs  were  not  used,  although  there 
is  evidence  that  they  were.  But  the  most  potent  drugs  for 
forcing  “confessions”  were  in  the  make-up  of  the  criminal  him¬ 
self. 

Common  criminals,  that  is,  those  who  are  not  Communists, 
do  not  go  into  trances  and  make  hysterical  confessions  and  pray 
for  death  as  a  reward  for  their  “sins.”  This  was  done  only  by 
“men  of  a  special  stamp”— the  Communists.  They  were  first 
morally  shocked  by  the  violence  and  amorality  of  the  beatings 
and  accusations  leveled  at  them  secretly  by  the  top  party  leader¬ 
ship,  in  whose  complete  amorality  they  could  not  believe,  even 
if  they  had  occasionally  found  fault  with  them  before.  Sud¬ 
denly,  they  found  themselves  uprooted;  their  own  class  in  the 
person  of  Communist  leadership  had  left  them;  innocent  as 
they  were,  the  class  itself  had  even  nailed  them  to  the  cross  as 


THE  AIM  AND  THE  MEANS 


157 


criminals  and  traitors.  Long  ago  they  had  been  educated  to 
believe  and  had  proclaimed  that  they  were  connected  in  every 
fiber  of  their  being  to  the  party  and  its  ideals.  Now,  uprooted, 
they  found  themselves  completely  bereft.  They  either  did  not 
know  or  had  forgotten  or  renounced  all  of  those  outside  the 
Communist  sect  and  its  narrow  ideas.  Now  it  was  too  late  to 
get  acquainted  with  anything  but  Communism.  They  were 
entirely  alone. 

Man  cannot  fight  or  live  outside  of  society.  This  is  his 
immutable  characteristic,  one  which  Aristotle  noted  and  ex¬ 
plained,  calling  it  “political  being.” 

What  else  is  left  to  a  man  from  such  a  sect  who  finds  himself 
morally  crushed  and  uprooted,  exposed  to  refined  and  brutal 
torture,  except  to  aid  the  class  and  his  “comrades”  with  his 
“confessions”?  Such  confessions,  he  is  convinced,  are  necessary 
to  the  class  to  resist  the  “anti-Socialist”  opposition  and  “im¬ 
perialists.”  These  confessions  are  the  one  “great”  and  “revolu¬ 
tionary”  contribution  left  that  the  victim,  lost  and  wrecked, 
can  make. 

Every  true  Communist  has  been  educated  and  has  educated 
himself  and  others  in  the  belief  that  fractions  and  fractional 
battles  are  among  the  greatest  crimes  against  the  party  and 
its  aims.  It  is  true  that  a  Communist  party  which  was  divided 
by  fractions  could  neither  win  in  the  revolution  nor  establish 
its  dominance.  Unity  at  any  price  and  without  consideration 
for  anything  else  becomes  a  mystical  obligation  behind  which 
the  aspirations  of  the  oligarchs  for  complete  power  entrench 
themselves.  Even  if  he  has  suspected  this,  or  even  known  it, 
the  demoralized  Communist  oppositionist  has  still  not  freed 
himself  of  the  mystic  idea  of  unity.  Besides,  he  may  think  that 
leaders  come  and  go,  and  that  these  too— the  evil,  the  stupid, 
the  egotistical,  the  inconsequential  and  the  power-loving— will 
disappear,  while  the  goal  will  remain.  The  goal  is  everything; 
has  it  not  always  been  thus  in  the  party? 

Trotsky  himself,  who  was  the  most  important  of  all  the  oppo- 


158 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


sitionists,  did  not  go  much  further  in  his  reasoning.  In  a 
moment  of  self-criticism,  he  shouted  that  the  party  is  infallible, 
for  it  is  the  incarnation  of  historical  necessity,  of  a  classless 
society.  In  attempting  to  explain,  in  his  exile,  the  monstrous 
amorality  of  the  Moscow  trials,  he  leaned  on  historical  anal¬ 
ogies:  Rome,  before  the  conquest  of  Christianity;  and  the 
Renaissance,  at  the  beginning  of  capitalism;  in  both  of  which 
also  appeared  the  inevitable  phenomena  of  perfidious  murders, 
calumnies,  lies,  and  monstrous  mass  crimes.  So  it  must  be  dur¬ 
ing  the  transition  to  socialism,  he  concluded;  these  were  the 
remnants  of  the  old  class  society  which  were  still  evident  in 
the  new.  However,  he  did  not  succeed  in  explaining  anything 
through  this;  he  only  succeeded  in  appeasing  his  conscience, 
in  that  he  did  not  "betray”  the  "dictatorship  of  the  proletariat,” 
or  the  Soviets,  as  the  one  form  of  the  transition  into  the  new 
and  classless  society.  If  he  had  gone  into  the  problem  more 
deeply,  he  would  have  seen  that,  in  Communism  as  in  the 
Renaissance  and  other  periods  in  history,  when  an  ownership 
class  is  breaking  a  trail  for  itself,  moral  considerations  play  a 
smaller  and  smaller  role  as  the  difficulties  of  the  class  increase 
and  as  its  domination  needs  to  become  more  complete. 

In  the  same  way,  those  who  did  not  understand  what  sort  of 
social  transformation  was  actually  at  stake  after  the  Communists 
were  victorious  had  to  re-evaluate  the  diverse  moral  crises 
among  the  Communists.  The  so-called  process  of  de-Staliniza- 
tion,  or  the  unprincipled,  somewhat  Stalinist-style,  attacks  on 
Stalin  by  his  former  courtiers  are  also  re-evaluated  as  “a  moral 
crisis.” 

Moral  crises,  great  or  small,  are  inevitable  in  every  dictator¬ 
ship,  for  its  followers,  accustomed  to  thinking  that  uniformity 
of  political  thought  is  the  greatest  patriotic  virtue  and  the  most 
holy  civil  obligation,  must  be  disturbed  over  the  inevitable 
reversals  and  changes. 

But  the  Communists  feel  and  know  that  their  totalitarian 
domination  does  not  weaken,  but  rather  gets  stronger,  in  such 


159 


THE  AIM  AND  THE  MEANS 
revenals;  that  this  is  its  inevitable  path;  and  that  moral  and 
similar  reasons  play  only  a  secondary  role,  if  they  are  not  even 
a  hindrance.  Practice  very  rapidly  teaches  them  this.  Conse¬ 
quently,  their  moral  crises,  no  matter  how  profound,  end  very 
quickly.  Of  course,  the  Communists  cannot  be  selective  in  the 
means  they  use  if  they  desire  to  achieve  the  real  aim  to  which 
they  aspire,  and  which  they  conceal  under  the  cover  of  the 
ideal  aim. 


4. 


Moral  downgrading  in  the  eyes  of  other  men  does  not  yet 
mean  that  Communism  is  weak.  Generally,  until  now,  it  has 
meant  the  reverse.  The  various  purges  and  “Moscow  trials” 
strengthened  the  Communist  system  and  Stalin.  In  all  events, 
certain  strata— the  intellectuals  with  Gide  as  the  most  famous 
example— renounced  Communism  because  of  this  and  doubted 
that  Communism  as  it  is  today  could  realize  the  ideas  and  ideals 
they  believed  in.  However,  Communism,  such  as  it  is,  has  not 
become  weaker:  the  new  class  has  become  stronger,  more  secure, 
freeing  itself  from  moral  considerations,  wading  in  the  blood 
of  every  adherent  of  the  Communist  idea.  Although  it  has  been 
morally  downgraded  in  the  eyes  of  others.  Communism  has 
actually  been  strengthened  in  the  eyes  of  its  own  class  and  in  its 
domination  over  society. 

Other  conditions  would  be  necessary  for  contemporary  Com¬ 
munism  to  be  lowered  in  the  estimation  of  the  ranks  of  its 
own  class.  It  is  necessary  for  the  revolution  not  only  to  devour 
its  own  children,  but— one  might  say— devour  itself.  It  is  neces¬ 
sary  for  its  greatest  minds  to  perceive  that  it  is  the  exploiting 
class  and  that  its  reign  is  unjustified.  Concretely  speaking,  it  is 
necessary  for  the  class  to  perceive  that  in  the  near  future  there 
cannot  be  any  talk  of  the  withering  away  of  the  state,  or  talk 
of  a  Communist  society— in  which  everyone  will  work  according 


160 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


to  his  capabilities  and  will  receive  according  to  his  needs.  The 
class  must  recognize  that  the  jjossibility  of  such  a  society  can 
as  well  be  refuted  as  it  can  be  demonstrated.  Thus  the  means 
that  this  class  used  and  is  using  to  achieve  its  aim  and  domi¬ 
nance  would  become  absurd,  inhumane,  and  contrary  to 
its  great  purpose— even  to  the  class  itself.  This  would  mean 
that  there  were  cleavages  and  vacillations,  which  could  not 
longer  be  checked,  among  the  ruling  class.  In  other  words,  the 
battle  for  its  own  existence  would  drive  the  ruling  class  itself, 
or  individual  fractions  of  it,  to  renounce  the  current  means 
it  is  using,  or  renounce  the  idea  that  its  goals  are  within  sight 
and  real. 

There  is  no  prospect  of  such  a  development  here  as  a  purely 
theoretic  proposition— in  any  of  the  Communist  countries,  least 
of  all  in  the  post-Stalin  U.S.S.R.  The  ruling  class  is  still  a  com¬ 
pact  one  there:  the  condemnation  of  Stalin’s  methods  has 
evolved,  even  in  theory,  into  protecting  the  U.S.S.R.  from  the 
despotism  of  a  personal  dictatorship.  At  the  Twentieth  Party 
Congress,  Khrushchev  advocated  “necessary  terrorism”  against 
the  “enemy,”  in  contrast  to  Stalin’s  despotism  against  “good 
Communists.”  Khrushchev  did  not  condemn  Stalin’s  methods 
as  such,  but  only  their  use  in  the  ranks  of  the  ruling  class.  It 
seems  that  the  relations  within  the  class,  which  has  become 
strong  enough  to  avoid  surrender  to  the  absolute  dominance 
of  its  leader  and  police  apparatus,  have  changed  since  Stalin. 
The  class  itself  and  its  methods  have  not  considerably  changed 
in  terms  of  internal  cleavages  with  regard  to  moral  cohesion. 
The  first  signs  of  cleavage,  however,  are  present;  these  are 
evidencing  themselves  in  the  ideological  crisis.  But  in  spite  of 
this  it  must  be  realized  that  the  process  of  moral  disintegration 
has  scarcely  begun;  the  conditions  hardly  exist  for  it  to  happen. 

Arrogating  certain  rights  to  itself,  the  ruling  oligarchy  cannot 
avoid  allowing  the  crumbs  of  such  rights  to  fall  to  the  people. 
It  is  impossible  for  the  oligarchy  to  lecture  on  the  lack  of 
rights  under  Stalin  even  among  the  Communists,  and  not  at 


THE  AIM  AND  THE  MEANS 


161 


the  same  time  expect  an  echo  among  the  masses— who  are  im¬ 
measurably  more  deprived  of  their  rights.  The  French  bour¬ 
geoisie  finally  rebelled  against  its  emperor,  Napoleon,  when 
his  wars  and  bureaucratic  despotism  became  intolerable.  But 
the  French  people  eventually  got  some  profit  from  this.  Stalin’s 
methods,  in  which  the  dogmatic  hypothesis  of  a  future  society 
also  played  an  important  role,  will  not  return.  But  this  does 
not  mean  that  the  current  oligarchs  will  renounce  the  use  of 
all  his  means,  even  though  they  cannot  use  them,  or  that  the 
U.S.S.R.  will  soon  or  overnight  become  a  legal,  democratic 
state. 

However,  something  has  changed.  The  ruling  class  will  no 
longer  be  able  to  justify  even  to  itself  that  the  end  justifies 
the  means.  The  class  will  still  lecture  on  the  final  goal— a  Com¬ 
munist  society— for  if  it  did  otherwise  it  would  have  to  renounce 
absolute  dominance.  This  will  force  it  to  resort  to  any  means. 
Every  time  that  it  does  resort  to  them,  it  will  also  have  to 
condemn  their  use.  A  stronger  power— fear  of  public  opinion 
in  the  world,  fear  that  it  will  bring  harm  to  itself  and  its 
absolute  domination— will  sway  the  class  and  hold  back  its 
hand.  Feeling  itself  sufficiently  strong  to  destroy  the  cult  of 
its  creator,  or  the  creator  of  the  system— Stalin— it  simultane¬ 
ously  gave  the  death  blow  to  its  own  ideal  basis.  Completely 
dominant,  the  ruling  class  has  begun  to  abandon  and  lose  the 
ideology,  the  dogma  which  brought  it  to  power.  The  class  has 
begun  to  split  up  into  fractions.  At  the  top  everything  is  peace¬ 
ful  and  smooth,  but  below  the  top,  in  the  depths,  and  even  in 
its  ranks,  new  thoughts,  new  ideas,  are  bubbling  and  future 
storms  are  brewing. 

Because  it  had  to  renounce  Stalin’s  methods,  the  ruling  class 
will  not  be  able  to  preserve  its  dogma.  The  methods  were 
actually  only  the  expression  of  that  dogma,  and,  indeed,  of 
the  practice  on  which  the  dogma  was  based. 

It  was  not  good  will,  still  less  humanity,  which  prompted 
Stalin’s  associates  to  perceive  the  harmfulness  of  Stalin’s  meth- 


162 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


ods.  It  was  urgent  necessity  that  prompted  the  ruling  class  to 
become  more  “understanding.”  But,  by  avoiding  the  use  of 
very  brutal  methods,  the  oligarchs  cannot  help  but  plant  the 
seed  of  doubt  about  their  goals.  The  end  once  served  as  moral 
cover  for  the  use  of  any  means.  Renouncing  the  use  of  such 
means  will  arouse  doubts  as  to  the  end  itself.  As  soon  as  means 
which  would  insure  an  end  are  shown  to  be  evil,  the  end  will 
show  itself  as  being  unrealizable.  For  the  essential  thing  in 
every  policy  is  first  of  all  the  means,  assuming  that  all  ends 
apjrear  good.  Even  “the  road  to  hell  is  paved  with  good  in¬ 
tentions.” 


5. 


Throughout  history  there  have  been  no  ideal  ends  which 
were  attained  with  non-ideal,  inhumane  means,  just  as  there 
has  been  no  free  society  which  was  built  by  slaves.  Nothing  so 
well  reveals  the  reality  and  greatness  of  ends  as  the  methods 
used  to  attain  them. 

If  the  end  must  be  used  to  condone  the  means,  then  there  is 
something  in  the  end  itself,  in  its  reality,  which  is  not  worthy. 
That  which  really  blesses  the  end,  which  justifies  the  eSorts 
and  sacrifices  for  it,  is  the  means:  their  constant  perfection, 
humaneness,  increasing  freedom. 

Contemporary  Communism  has  not  even  reached  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  such  a  situation.  Instead,  it  has  stopped  dead,  hesitating 
over  its  means,  but  always  assured  about  its  ends. 

No  regime  in  history  which  was  democratic— or  relatively 
democratic  while  it  lasted— was  predominantly  established  on 
the  aspiration  for  ideal  ends,  but  rather  on  the  small  everyday 
means  in  sight.  Along  with  this,  each  such  regime  achieved, 
more  or  less  spontaneously,  great  ends.  On  the  other  hand, 
every  despotism  tried  to  justify  itself  by  its  ideal  aims.  Not  a 
single  one  achieved  great  ends. 


THE  AIM  AND  THE  MEANS 


163 


Absolute  brutality,  or  the  use  of  any  means,  is  in  accord  with 
the  grandiosity,  even  with  the  unreality,  of  Communist  aims. 

By  revolutionary  means,  contemporary  Communism  has  suc¬ 
ceeded  in  demolishing  one  form  of  society  and  despotically 
setting  up  another.  At  first  it  was  guided  by  the  most  beautiful, 
primordial  human  ideas  of  equality  and  brotherhood;  only 
later  did  it  conceal  behind  these  ideas  the  establishment  of  its 
domination  by  whatever  means. 

As  Dostoyevski  has  his  hero  Shigaliev  say,  quoted  by  another 
character,  in  The  Possessed: 

.  .  He’s  written  a  good  thing  in  that  manuscript,”  Ver. 
khovensky  went  on.  .  . .  “Every  member  of  the  society  spies  on 
the  others,  and  it's  his  duty  to  inform  against  them.  Every  one 
belongs  to  all  and  all  to  every  one.  All  are  slaves  and  equal 
in  their  slavery.  In  extreme  cases  he  advocates  slander  and 
murder,  but  the  great  thing  about  it  is  equality.  .  .  .  Slaves  are 
bound  to  be  equal.  There  has  never  been  either  freedom  or 
equality  without  despotism.  .  .  .” 

Thus,  by  justifying  the  means  because  of  the  end,  the  end 
itself  becomes  increasingly  more  distant  and  unrealistic,  while 
the  frightful  reality  of  the  means  becomes  increasingly  obvious 
and  intolerable. 


The  Essence 


1. 


None  of  the  theories  on  the  essence  of  contemporary  Com 
munism  treats  the  matter  exhaustively.  Neither  does  this  theory 
claim  to  do  so.  Contemporary  Communism  is  the  product  of 
a  series  of  historical,  economic,  political,  ideological,  national, 
and  international  causes.  A  categorical  theory  about  its  essence 
cannot  be  entirely  accurate. 

The  essence  of  contemporary  Communism  could  not  even  be 
perceived  until,  in  the  course  of  its  development,  it  revealed 
itself  to  its  very  entrails.  This  moment  came,  and  could  only 
come,  because  Communism  entered  a  particular  phase  of  its 
development— that  of  its  maturity.  It  then  became  possible  to 
reveal  the  nature  of  its  power,  ownership,  and  ideology.  In 
the  time  that  Communism  was  developing  and  was  predomi¬ 
nantly  an  ideology,  it  was  almost  impossible  to  see  through  it 
completely. 

Just  as  other  truths  are  the  work  of  many  authors,  countries, 
and  movements,  so  it  is  with  contemporary  Communism.  Com¬ 
munism  has  been  revealed  gradually,  more  or  less  parallel  to 
its  development;  it  cannot  be  looked  upon  as  final,  because  it 
has  not  completed  its  development. 

Most  of  the  theories  regarding  Communism,  however,  have 


164 


THE  ESSENCE 


165 


some  truth  in  them.  Each  of  them  has  usually  grasped  one 
aspect  of  Communism  or  one  aspect  of  its  essence. 

There  are  two  basic  theses  on  the  essence  of  contemporary 
Communism. 

The  first  of  them  claims  that  contemporary  Communism  is 
a  type  of  new  religion.  We  have  already  seen  that  it  is  neither 
a  religion  nor  a  church,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  it  contains 
elements  of  both. 

The  second  thesis  regards  Communism  as  revolutionary  so¬ 
cialism,  that  is,  something  which  was  bom  of  modem  industry, 
or  capitalism,  and  of  the  proletariat  and  its  needs.  We  have 
seen  that  this  thesis  also  is  only  partially  accurate:  contem¬ 
porary  Communism  began  in  well-developed  countries  as  a 
socialist  ideology  and  a  reaction  against  the  suffering  of  the 
working  masses  in  the  industrial  revolution.  But  after  having 
come  into  power  in  underdeveloped  areas,  it  became  something 
entirely  different— an  exploiting  system  opposed  to  most  of  the 
interests  of  the  proletariat  itself. 

The  thesis  has  also  been  advanced  that  contemporary  Com¬ 
munism  is  only  a  contemporary  form  of  despotism,  produced 
by  men  as  soon  as  they  seize  power.  The  nature  of  the  modem 
economy,  which  in  every  case  requires  centralized  administra¬ 
tion,  has  made  it  possible  for  this  despotism  to  be  absolute. 
This  thesis  also  has  some  truth  in  it:  modern  Communism  is  a 
modem  despotism  which  cannot  help  but  aspire  toward  to¬ 
talitarianism.  However,  all  types  of  modem  desjwtism  are  not 
variants  of  Communism,  nor  are  they  totalitarian  to  the  degree 
that  Communism  is. 

Thus  whatever  thesis  we  examine,  we  find  that  each  thesis 
explains  one  aspect  of  Communism,  or  a  part  of  the  truth,  but 
not  the  entire  truth. 

Neither  can  my  theory  on  the  essence  of  Communism  be 
accepted  as  complete.  This  is,  anyway,  the  weakness  of  every 


166 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


definition,  especially  when  such  complex  and  living  matters 
as  social  phenomena  are  being  defined. 

Nevertheless,  it  is  possible  to  speak  in  the  most  abstract 
theoretical  way  about  the  essence  of  contemporary  Commu¬ 
nism,  about  what  is  most  essential  in  it,  and  what  permeates 
all  its  manifestations  and  inspires  all  of  its  activity.  It  is  possible 
to  penetrate  deeper  into  this  essence,  to  elucidate  its  various 
aspects;  but  the  essence  itself  has  already  been  exposed. 

Communism,  and  likewise  its  essence,  is  continuously  chang¬ 
ing  from  one  form  to  another.  Without  this  change  it  cannot 
even  exist.  Consequently,  these  changes  require  continuous 
examination  and  a  deeper  study  of  the  already  obvious  truth. 

The  essence  of  contemporary  Communism  is  the  product 
of  particular  conditions,  historical  and  others.  But  as  soon  as 
Communism  becomes  strong,  the  essence  itself  becomes  a  factor 
and  creates  the  conditions  for  its  own  continued  existence. 
Consequently,  it  is  evident  that  it  is  necessary  to  examine  the 
essence  separately  according  to  the  form  and  the  conditions  in 
which  it  appears  and  is  operating  at  a  given  moment. 


2. 


The  theory  that  contemporary  Communism  is  a  type  of 
modem  totalitarianism  is  not  only  the  most  widespread,  but 
also  the  most  accurate.  However,  an  actual  understanding  of 
the  term  “modern  totalitarianism”  where  Communism  is  being 
discussed  is  not  so  widespread. 

Contemporary  Communism  is  that  type  of  totalitarianism 
which  consists  of  three  basic  factors  for  controlling  the  people. 
The  first  is  power;  the  second,  ownership;  the  third,  ideology. 
They  are  monopolized  by  the  one  and  only  political  party,  or— 
according  to  my  previous  explanation  and  terminology— by  a 
new  class;  and,  at  present,  by  the  oligarchy  of  that  party  or  of 
that  class.  No  totalitarian  system  in  history,  not  even  a  contem- 


THE  ESSENCE 


167 


porary  one— with  the  exception  oE  Communism— has  succeeded 
in  incorporating  simultaneously  all  these  factors  for  controlling 
the  people  to  this  degree. 

When  one  examines  and  weighs  these  three  factors,  power 
is  the  one  which  has  played  and  still  continues  to  play  the  most 
important  role  in  the  development  of  Communism.  One  of  the 
other  factors  may  eventually  prevail  over  power,  but  it  is  im¬ 
possible  to  determine  this  on  the  basis  of  present  conditions. 
I  believe  that  power  will  remain  the  basic  characteristic  of 
Communism. 

Communism  first  originated  as  an  ideology,  which  contained 
in  its  seed  Communism’s  totalitarian  and  monopolistic  nature. 
It  can  certainly  be  said  that  ideas  no  longer  play  the  main, 
predominant  role  in  Communism’s  control  of  the  people.  Com¬ 
munism  as  an  ideology  has  mainly  run  its  course.  It  does  not 
have  many  new  things  to  reveal  to  the  world.  This  could  not 
be  said  for  the  other  two  factors,  power  and  ownership. 

It  can  be  said:  power,  either  physical,  intellectual,  or  eco¬ 
nomic,  plays  a  role  in  every  struggle,  even  in  every  social  human 
action.  There  is  some  truth  in  this.  It  can  also  be  said:  in  every 
policy,  power,  or  the  struggle  to  acquire  and  keep  it,  is  the  basic 
problem  and  aim.  There  is  some  truth  in  this  also.  But  con¬ 
temporary  Communism  is  not  only  such  a  power;  it  is  some¬ 
thing  more.  It  is  power  of  a  particular  type,  a  power  which 
unites  within  itself  the  control  of  ideas,  authority,  and  owner¬ 
ship,  a  power  which  has  become  an  end  in  itself. 

To  date,  Soviet  Communism,  the  type  which  has  existed  the 
longest  and  which  is  the  most  developed,  has  passed  through 
three  phases.  This  is  also  more  or  less  true  of  other  types  of 
Communism  which  have  succeeded  in  coming  to  power  (with 
the  exception  of  the  Chinese  type,  which  is  still  predominantly 
in  the  second  phase) . 

The  three  phases  are:  revolutionary,  dogmatic,  and  non- 
dogmatic  Communism.  Roughly  speaking,  the  principal  catch¬ 
words,  aims,  and  personalities  corresponding  to  these  various 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


168 

phases  are:  Revolution,  or  the  usurpation  of  power— Lenin. 
“Socialism,”  or  the  building  of  the  system— Stalin.  “Legality,” 
or  stabilization  of  the  system—  “collective  leadership.” 

It  is  important  to  note  that  these  phases  are  not  distinctly 
separate  from  one  another,  that  elements  of  all  are  found  in 
each.  Dogmatism  abounded,  and  the  “building  of  socialism” 
had  already  begun,  in  the  Leninist  period;  Stalin  did  not  re¬ 
nounce  revolution,  or  reject  the  dogmas,  which  interfered  with 
the  building  of  the  system.  Present-day,  non-dogmatic  Com¬ 
munism  is  only  non-dogmatic  conditionally:  it  just  will  not 
renounce  even  the  minutest  practical  advantages  for  dogmatic 
reasons.  Precisely  because  of  such  advantages,  it  will  at  the  same 
time  be  in  a  position  to  persecute  unscrupulously  the  minutest 
doubt  concerning  the  truth  or  purity  of  the  dogma.  Thus, 
Communism,  proceeding  from  practical  needs  and  capabilities, 
has  today  even  furled  the  sails  of  revolution,  or  of  its  own 
military  expansion.  But  it  has  not  renounced  one  or  the  other. 

This  division  into  three  phases  is  only  accurate  if  it  is  taken 
roughly  and  abstractly.  Clearly  separate  phases  do  not  actually 
exist,  nor  do  they  correspond  to  specific  periods  in  the  various 
countries. 

The  boundaries  between  the  phases,  which  overlap,  and  the 
forms  in  which  the  phases  appear  are  varied  in  different  Com¬ 
munist  countries.  For  example,  Yugoslavia  has  passed  through 
all  three  phases  in  a  relatively  short  time  and  with  the  same 
personalities  at  the  summit.  This  is  obvious  in  both  precepts 
and  method  of  operation. 

Power  plays  a  major  role  in  all  three  of  these  phases.  In  the 
revolution  it  was  necessary  to  seize  power;  in  the  building  of 
socialism,  it  was  necessary  to  create  a  new  system  by  means  of 
that  power;  today  power  must  preserve  the  system. 

During  the  development,  from  the  first  to  the  third  phase, 
the  quintessence  of  Communism— power— evolved  from  being 
the  means  and  became  an  end  in  itself.  Actually  power  was  al¬ 
ways  more  or  less  the  end,  but  Communist  leaders,  thinking  that 


THE  ESSENCE 


169 


through  power  as  a  means  they  would  attain  the  ideal  goal, 
did  not  believe  it  to  be  an  end  in  itself.  Precisely  because  power 
served  as  a  means  for  the  Utopian  transformation  of  society, 
it  could  not  avoid  becoming  an  end  in  itself  and  the  most 
important  aim  of  Communism.  Power  was  able  to  appear  as 
a  means  in  the  first  and  second  phases.  It  can  no  longer  be 
concealed  that  in  the  third  phase  power  is  the  actual  principal 
aim  and  essence  of  Communism. 

Because  of  the  fact  that  Communism  is  being  extinguished 
as  an  ideology,  it  must  maintain  power  as  the  main  means  of 
controlling  the  people. 

In  revolution,  as  in  every  type  of  war,  it  was  natural  to  con¬ 
centrate  primarily  on  power:  the  war  had  to  be  won.  During 
the  period  of  industrialization,  concentrating  on  power  could 
still  be  considered  natural:  the  construction  of  industry,  or 
a  “socialist  society,”  for  which  so  many  sacrifices  had  been  made, 
was  necessary.  But  as  all  this  is  being  completed,  it  becomes 
apparent  that  in  Communism  power  has  not  only  been  a  means 
but  that  it  has  also  become  the  main,  if  not  the  sole,  end. 

Today  power  is  both  the  means  and  the  goal  of  Communists, 
in  order  that  they  may  maintain  their  privileges  and  ownership. 
But  since  these  are  special  forms  of  power  and  ownership,  it 
is  only  through  power  itself  that  ownership  can  be  exercised. 
Power  is  an  end  in  itself  and  the  essence  of  contemporary 
Communism.  Other  classes  may  be  able  to  maintain  ownership 
without  a  monopoly  over  power,  or  power  without  a  monopoly 
over  ownership.  Until  now,  this  has  not  been  possible  for  the 
new  class,  which  was  formed  through  Communism;  it  is  very 
improbable  that  it  will  be  possible  in  the  future. 

Throughout  all  three  of  these  phases,  power  has  concealed 
itself  as  the  hidden,  invisible,  unspoken,  natural  and  principal 
end.  Its  role  has  been  stronger  or  weaker  depending  on  the 
degree  of  control  over  the  people  required  at  the  time.  In  the 
first  phase,  ideas  were  the  inspiration  and  the  prime  mover  for 
the  attainment  of  power;  in  the  second  phase,  power  operated 


170 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


as  the  whip  of  society  and  for  its  own  maintainance;  today, 
‘collective  ownership”  is  subordinated  to  the  impulses  and 
needs  of  power. 

Power  is  the  alpha  and  the  omega  of  contemporary  Com¬ 
munism,  even  when  Communism  strives  to  prevent  this. 

Ideas,  philosophical  principles  and  moral  considerations, 
the  nation  and  the  people,  their  history,  in  part  even  owner¬ 
ship-all  can  be  changed  and  sacrificed.  But  not  power.  Because 
this  would  signify  Communism’s  renunciation  of  itself,  of  its 
own  essence.  Individuals  can  do  this.  But  the  class,  the  party, 
the  oligarchy  cannot.  This  is  the  purpose  and  the  meaning  of  its 
existence. 

Every  type  of  power  besides  being  a  means  is  at  the  same 
time  and  end— at  least  for  those  who  aspire  to  it.  Power  is 
almost  exclusively  an  end  in  Communism,  because  it  is  both 
the  source  and  the  guarantee  of  all  privileges.  By  means  of 
and  through  power  the  material  privileges  and  ownership  of 
the  ruling  class  over  national  goods  are  realized.  Power  de¬ 
termines  the  value  of  ideas,  and  suppresses  or  permits  their 
expression. 

It  is  in  this  way  that  power  in  contemporary  Communism 
differs  from  all  other  types  of  power,  and  that  Communism 
itself  differs  from  every  other  system. 

Communism  has  to  be  totalitarian,  exclusive,  and  isolated 
precisely  because  power  is  the  most  essential  component  of 
Communism.  If  Communism  actually  could  have  had  other 
ends,  it  would  have  to  make  it  possible  for  other  forces  to 
spring  up  in  opposition  and  operate  independently. 

How  contemporary  Communism  will  be  defined  is  secondary. 
Everyone  who  undertakes  the  work  of  explaining  Communism 
finds  himself  faced  with  the  problem  of  defining  it,  even  if 
actual  conditions  do  not  compel  him  to  do  this— conditions 
in  which  Communists  glorify  their  system  as  “socialism,”  “class¬ 
less  society,”  and  “the  realization  of  men’s  eternal  dreams,” 
while  the  opposing  element  defines  Communism  as  an  insensi- 


THE  ESSENCE 


171 


live  tyranny,  the  chance  success  of  a  terroristic  group,  and  the 
damnation  of  the  human  race. 

Science  must  use  already  established  categories  in  order  to 
make  a  simple  exposition.  Is  there  any  category  in  sociology 
into  which  we  can  cram  contemporary  Communism  if  we  use 
a  little  force? 

In  common  with  many  authors  who  started  from  other  posi¬ 
tions,  I  have,  in  recent  years,  equated  Communism  with  state 
capitalism  or,  more  precisely,  with  total  state  capitalism. 

This  interpretation  won  out  among  the  leaders  of  Yugoslav 
Communists  during  the  time  of  their  clash  with  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  the  U.S.S.R.  But  just  as  Communists,  according  to 
practical  needs,  easily  change  even  their  “scientific”  analysis, 
Yugoslav  party  leaders  changed  this  interpretation  after  the 
"reconciliation”  with  the  Soviet  government,  and  once  more 
proclaimed  the  U.S.S.R.  a  Socialist  country.  At  the  same  time, 
they  proclaimed  the  Soviet  imperialistic  attack  on  the  inde¬ 
pendence  of  Yugoslavia— in  Tito’s  words— a  “tragic,”  “incom¬ 
prehensible"  event,  evoked  by  the  “arbitrariness  of  individuals.” 

Contemporary  Communism  for  the  most  part  does  resemble 
total  state  capitalism.  Its  historical  origin  and  the  problems 
which  it  had  to  solve— namely,  an  industrial  transformation 
similar  to  the  one  achieved  by  capitalism  but  with  the  aid  of 
the  state  mechanism— lead  to  such  a  conclusion. 

If,  under  Communism,  the  state  were  the  owner  in  the  name 
of  society  and  of  the  nation,  then  the  forms  of  political  power 
over  society  would  inevitably  change  according  to  the  varying 
needs  of  society  and  of  the  nation.  The  state  by  its  nature  is 
an  organ  of  unity  and  harmony  in  society,  and  not  only  a  force 
over  it.  The  state  could  not  be  both  the  owner  and  ruler  in 
itself.  In  Communism  it  is  reversed:  The  state  is  an  instrument 
and  always  subordinate  exclusively  to  the  interests  of  one  and 
the  same  exclusive  owner,  or  of  one  and  the  same  direction  in 
the  economy,  and  in  the  other  areas  of  social  life. 

State  ownership  in  the  West  might  be  considered  more  as 


172  THE  NEW  CLASS 

state  capitalism  than  it  is  in  Communist  countries.  The  claim 
that  contemporary  Communism  is  state  capitalism  is  prompted 
by  the  “pangs  of  conscience”  of  those  who  were  disillusioned 
by  the  Communist  system,  but  who  did  not  succeed  in  defining 
it;  they  therefore  equate  its  evils  with  those  of  capitalism. 
Sirtce  there  is  really  no  private  ownership  in  Communism  but 
rather  formal  state  ownership,  nothing  seems  more  logical 
than  to  attribute  all  evils  to  the  state.  This  idea  of  state  capi¬ 
talism  is  also  accepted  by  those  who  see  ‘less  evil”  in  private 
capitalism.  Therefore  they  like  to  point  out  that  Communism 
is  a  worse  type  of  capitalism. 

To  claim  that  contemporary  Communism  is  a  transition  to 
something  else  leads  nowhere  and  explains  nothing.  What  is 
not  a  transition  to  something  else? 

Even  if  it  is  accepted  that  it  has  many  of  the  characteristics 
of  an  all-encompassing  state  capitalism,  contemporary  Com¬ 
munism  also  has  so  many  of  its  own  characteristics  that  it  is 
more  precise  to  consider  it  a  special  type  of  new  social  system. 

Contemporary  Communism  has  its  own  essence  which  does 
not  permit  it  to  be  confused  with  any  other.  Communism, 
while  absorbing  into  itself  all  kinds  of  other  elements— feudal, 
capitalist,  and  even  slave-owning— remains  individual  and  in¬ 
dependent  at  the  same  time. 


National  Communism 


1. 


In  essence,  Communism  is  only  one  thing,  but  it  is  realized 
in  different  degrees  and  manners  in  every  country.  Therefore 
it  is  possible  to  speak  of  various  Communist  systems,  i.e.,  of 
various  forms  of  the  same  manifestation. 

The  differences  which  exist  between  Communist  states— dif¬ 
ferences  that  Stalin  attempted  futilely  to  remove  by  force— are 
the  result,  above  all,  of  diverse  historical  backgrounds.  Even 
the  most  cursory  observation  reveals  how,  for  example,  con¬ 
temporary  Soviet  bureaucracy  is  not  without  a  connecting  link 
with  the  Czarist  system  in  which  the  officials  were,  as  Engels 
noted,  “a  distinct  class.”  Somewhat  the  same  thing  can  also  be 
said  of  the  manner  of  government  in  Yugoslavia.  When  ascend¬ 
ing  to  power,  the  Communists  face  in  the  various  countries 
different  cultural  and  technical  levels  and  varying  social  rela¬ 
tionships,  and  are  faced  with  different  national  intellectual 
characters.  These  differences  develop  even  farther,  in  a  special 
way.  Because  the  general  causes  which  brought  them  to  power 
are  identical,  and  because  they  have  to  wage  a  struggle  against 
common  internal  and  foreign  opponents,  the  Communists 
in  separate  countries  are  immediately  compelled  to  fight  jointly 
and  on  the  basis  of  a  similar  ideology.  International  Com- 


173 


174  THE  NEW  CLAS? 

munism,  which  was  at  one  time  the  task  of  revolutionaries, 
eventually  transformed  itself,  as  did  everything  else  in  Com¬ 
munism,  and  became  the  common  ground  of  Communist 
bureaucracies,  fighting  one  another  on  nationalistic  con¬ 
siderations.  Of  the  former  international  proletariat,  only 
words  and  empty  dogmas  remained.  Behind  them  stood  the 
naked  national  and  international  interests,  aspirations,  and 
plans  of  the  various  Communist  oligarchies,  comfortably  en¬ 
trenched. 

The  nature  of  authority  and  property,  a  similar  international 
outlook,  and  an  identical  ideology  inevitably  identify  Com¬ 
munist  states  with  one  another.  Nevertheless,  it  is  wrong  to 
ignore  and  underestimate  the  significance  of  the  inevitable  di- 
ferences  in  degree  and  manner  betwen  Communist  states.  The 
degree,  manner,  and  form  in  which  Communism  will  be 
realized,  or  its  purpose,  is  just  as  much  of  a  given  condition 
for  each  of  them  as  is  the  essence  of  Communism  itself.  No 
single  form  of  Communism,  no  matter  how  similar  it  is  to  other 
forms,  exists  in  any  way  other  than  as  national  Communism. 
In  order  to  maintain  itself,  it  must  become  national. 

The  form  of  government  and  property  as  well  as  of  ideas 
differs  little  or  not  at  all  in  Communist  states.  It  cannot  differ 
markedly  since  it  has  an  identical  nature— total  authority.  How¬ 
ever,  if  they  wish  to  win  and  continue  to  exist,  the  Communists 
must  adapt  the  degree  and  manner  of  their  authority  to 
national  conditions. 

The  differences  between  Communist  countries  will,  as  a  rule, 
be  as  great  as  the  extent  to  which  the  Communists  were  inde¬ 
pendent  in  coming  to  power.  Concretely  speaking,  only  the 
Communists  of  three  countries— the  Soviet  Union,  China,  and 
Yugoslavia— independently  carried  out  revolutions  or,  in  their 
own  way  and  at  their  own  speed,  attained  power  and  began 
“the  building  of  socialism.”  These  three  countries  remained 
independent  as  Communist  states  even  in  the  period  when 
Yugoslavia  was— as  China  is  today— under  the  most  extreme 


NATIONAL  COMMUNISM 


175 


influence  of  the  Soviet  Union;  that  is,  in  “brotherly  love”  and 
in  "eternal  friendship”  with  it.  In  a  report  at  a  closed  session 
of  the  Twentieth  Congress,  Khrushchev  revealed  that  a  clash  be¬ 
tween  Stalin  and  the  Chinese  government  had  barely  been 
averted.  The  case  of  the  clash  with  Yugoslavia  was  not  an 
isolated  case,  but  only  the  most  drastic  and  the  first  to  occur. 
In  the  other  Communist  countries  the  Soviet  government  en¬ 
forced  Communism  by  “armed  missionaries”— its  army.  The 
diversity  of  manner  and  degree  of  the  development  in  these 
countries  has  still  not  attained  the  stage  reached  in  Yugoslavia 
and  China.  However,  to  the  extent  that  ruling  bureaucracies 
gather  strength  as  independent  bodies  in  these  countries,  and 
to  the  extent  that  they  recognize  that  obedience  to  and  copying 
of  the  Soviet  Union  weaken  themselves,  they  endeavor  to 
“pattern”  themselves  on  Yugoslavia:  that  is,  to  develop  inde¬ 
pendently.  The  Communist  East  European  countries  did  not 
become  satellites  of  the  U.S.S.R.  because  they  benefited  from 
it,  but  because  they  were  too  weak  to  prevent  it.  As  soon  as 
they  become  stronger,  or  as  soon  as  favorable  conditions  are 
created,  a  yearning  for  independence  and  for  protection  of 
“their  own  people”  from  Soviet  hegemony  will  rise  among 
them. 

With  the  victory  of  a  Communist  revolution  in  a  country 
a  new  class  comes  into  power  and  into  control.  It  is  unwilling 
to  surrender  its  own  hard-gained  privileges,  even  though  it 
subordinates  its  interests  to  a  similar  class  in  another  country, 
solely  in  the  cause  of  ideological  solidarity. 

Where  a  Communist  revolution  has  won  victory  independ¬ 
ently,  a  separate,  distinct  path  of  development  is  inevitable. 
Friction  with  other  Communist  countries,  especially  with  the 
Soviet  Union  as  the  most  important  and  most  imperialistic 
state,  follows.  The  ruling  national  bureaucracy  in  the  country 
where  the  victorious  revolution  took  place  has  already  become 
independent  in  the  course  of  the  armed  struggle  and  has  tasted 
the  blessings  of  authority  and  of  “nationalization”  of  property. 


176  THE  NEW  CLAS^ 

Philosophically  speaking,  it  has  also  grasped  and  become  con¬ 
scious  of  its  own  essence,  “its  own  state,”  its  authority,  on  the 
basis  of  which  it  claims  equality. 

This  does  not  mean  that  this  involves  only  a  clash— when  it 
comes  to  that— between  two  bureaucracies.  A  clash  also  involves 
the  revolutionary  elements  of  a  subordinated  country,  because 
they  do  not  usually  tolerate  domination  and  they  consider  that 
relationships  between  Communist  states  must  be  as  ideally  per¬ 
fect  as  predicted  in  dogma.  The  masses  of  the  nation,  who 
spontaneously  thirst  for  independence,  cannot  remain  unper¬ 
turbed  in  such  a  clash.  In  every  case  the  nation  benefits  from 
this:  it  does  not  have  to  pay  tribute  to  a  foreign  government; 
and  the  pressure  on  the  domestic  government,  which  no  longer 
desires,  and  is  not  permitted,  to  copy  foreign  methods,  is  also 
diminished.  Such  a  clash  also  brings  in  external  forces,  other 
states  and  movements.  However,  the  nature  of  the  clash 
and  the  basic  forces  in  it  remain.  Neither  Soviet  nor  Yugoslav 
Communists  stopped  being  what  they  are— not  before,  nor  dur¬ 
ing,  nor  after  their  mutual  bickerings.  Indeed,  the  diverse 
types  of  degree  and  manner  with  which  they  insured  their 
monopoly  led  them  mutually  to  deny  the  existence  of  socialism 
in  the  opposite  camp.  After  they  settled  their  differences,  they 
again  acknowledged  the  existence  of  socialism  elsewhere,  be¬ 
coming  conscious  that  they  must  respect  mutual  differences 
if  they  wanted  to  preserve  that  which  was  identical  in  essence 
and  most  important  to  them. 

The  subordinate  Communist  governments  in  East  Europe 
can,  in  fact  must,  declare  their  independence  from  the  Soviet 
government.  No  one  can  say  how  far  this  aspiration  for  inde¬ 
pendence  will  go  and  what  disagreements  will  result.  The  result 
depends  on  numerous  unforeseen  internal  and  external  circum¬ 
stances.  However,  there  is  no  doubt  that  a  national  Communist 
bureaucracy  aspires  to  more  complete  authority  for  itself.  This 
is  demonstrated  by  the  anti-Tito  processes  in  Stalin’s  time  in 


NATIONAL  COMMUNISM 


177 


the  East  European  countries;  it  is  shown  also  by  the  current 
unconcealed  emphasis  on  “one’s  own  path  to  socialism,”  which 
has  recently  come  to  light  sharply  in  Poland  and  Hungary. 
The  central  Soviet  government  has  found  itself  in  difficulty 
because  of  the  nationalism  existing  even  in  those  governments 
which  it  installed  in  the  Soviet  republics  (Ukraine,  Caucasia) , 
and  still  more  so  with  regard  to  those  governments  installed  in 
the  East  European  countries.  Playing  an  important  role  in  all 
of  this  is  the  fact  that  the  Soviet  Union  was  unable,  and  will 
not  be  able  in  the  future,  to  assimilate  the  economies  of  the 
East  European  countries. 

The  aspirations  toward  national  independence  must  of 
course  have  greater  impetus.  These  aspirations  can  be  retarded 
and  even  made  dormant  by  external  pressure  or  by  fear  on 
the  part  of  the  Communists  of  “imperialism”  and  the  “bour¬ 
geoisie,”  but  they  cannot  be  removed.  On  the  contrary,  their 
strength  will  grow. 

It  is  impossible  to  foresee  all  of  the  forms  that  relations 
between  Communist  states  will  assume.  Even  if  cooperation 
between  Communist  states  of  different  countries  should  in  a 
short  time  result  in  mergers  and  federations,  so  can  clashes 
between  Communist  states  result  in  war.  An  open,  armed  clash 
between  the  U.S.S.R.  and  Yugoslavia  was  averted  not  because 
of  the  “socialism”  in  one  or  the  other  country,  but  because  it 
was  not  in  Stalin’s  interest  to  risk  a  clash  of  unforeseeable  pro¬ 
portions.  Whatever  will  happen  between  Communist  states  will 
depend  on  all  those  factors  which  ordinarily  affect  political 
events.  The  interests  of  the  respective  Communist  bureauc¬ 
racies,  expressed  variously  as  “national”  or  as  “united,”  along 
with  the  unchecked  tendency  toward  ever  increasing  independ¬ 
ence  on  a  national  basis,  will,  for  the  time  being,  play  an 
important  role  in  the  relationships  among  the  Communist 
countries. 


178 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


2. 


The  concept  of  national  Communism  had  no  meaning  un¬ 
til  the  end  of  World  War  II,  when  Soviet  imperialism  was 
manifested  not  only  with  regard  to  the  capitalist  but  the  Com¬ 
munist  states  as  well.  This  concept  developed  above  all  from 
the  Yugoslav-U.S.S.R.  clash.  The  renunciation  of  Stalin’s  meth¬ 
ods  by  the  “collective  leadership”  of  Khrushchev-Bulganin  may 
perhaps  modify  relations  between  the  U.S.S.R.  and  other  Com¬ 
munist  countries,  but  it  cannot  resolve  them.  In  the  U.S.S.R. 
operations  are  not  concerned  solely  with  Communism  but  are 
simultaneously  concerned  with  the  imperialism  of  the  Great 
Russian— Soviet— state.  This  imperialism  can  change  in  form 
and  method,  but  it  can  no  more  disappear  than  can  the  aspi¬ 
rations  of  Communists  of  other  countries  for  independence. 

A  similar  development  awaits  the  other  Communist  states. 
According  to  strength  and  conditions,  they  too  will  attempt  to 
become  imperialistic  in  one  way  or  another. 

In  the  development  of  the  foreign  policy  of  the  U.S.S.R. 
there  have  been  two  imperialistic  phases.  Earlier  policy  was 
almost  exclusively  a  matter  of  expansion  by  revolutionary  prop 
aganda  in  other  countries.  At  that  time  there  were  powerful 
imperialistic  tendencies  (as  regards  the  Caucasus)  in  the  pol¬ 
icies  of  its  highest  leaders.  But,  in  my  opinion,  there  is  no 
satisfactory  reason  for  the  revolutionary  phase  to  be  categori¬ 
cally  considered  imperialistic,  since  at  that  time  it  was  more 
defensive  than  aggressive. 

If  we  do  not  consider  the  revolutionary  phase  as  imperialistic, 
then  imperialism  began,  roughly  sjreaking,  with  the  victory  of 
Stalin,  or  with  the  industrialization  and  establishment  of  the 
authority  of  a  new  class  in  the  1930’s.  This  change  was  clearly 
shotvn  on  the  eve  of  the  war  when  Stalin’s  government  was 
able  to  go  into  action  and  leave  behind  pacifist  and  anti-imper¬ 
ialistic  phases.  It  was  even  expressed  in  the  change  of  foreign 


NATIONAL  COMMUNISM 


179 


policy:  in  place  of  the  jovial  and,  to  a  certain  extent,  principled 
Litvinov,  the  unscrupulous  and  reserved  Molotov  appeared. 

The  basic  cause  of  an  imperialistic  policy  is  completely 
hidden  in  the  exploitative  and  despotic  nature  of  the  new  class. 
In  order  that  that  class  might  manifest  itself  as  imperialistic, 
it  was  necessary  for  it  to  attain  a  prescribed  strength  and  to 
appear  in  appropriate  circumstances.  It  already  had  this 
strength  when  World  War  II  began.  The  war  itself  abounded 
in  possiblities  for  imperialistic  combinations.  The  small  Baltic 
states  were  not  necessary  for  the  security  of  so  large  a  state  as 
the  U.S.S.R.,  particularly  in  modem  war.  These  states  were 
non-aggressive  and  even  allies;  however,  they  were  an  attractive 
morsel  for  the  insatiable  appetite  of  the  Great  Russian  Com¬ 
munist  bureaucracy. 

In  World  War  II  Communist  internationalism,  up  to  that 
time  an  integral  part  of  Soviet  foreign  policy,  came  into  conflict 
with  the  interests  of  the  ruling  Soviet  bureaucracy.  With  that, 
the  necessity  for  its  organization  ceased.  The  idea  of  dissolution 
of  the  Communist  International  (Comintern)  was  conceived, 
according  to  Georgi  Dimitrov,  after  the  subjugation  of  the 
Baltic  countries,  and  in  the  period  of  cooperation  with  Hitler, 
although  it  was  not  effected  until  the  second  phase  of  the  war 
during  the  period  of  alliance  with  the  Western  states. 

The  Cominform,  consisting  of  the  East  European  and  the 
French  and  Italian  Communist  parties,  was  created  on  Stalin’s 
initiative  in  order  to  guarantee  Soviet  domination  in  the  satel¬ 
lite  countries  and  to  intensify  its  influence  in  western  Europe, 
The  Cominform  was  worse  than  the  former  Communist  Inter¬ 
national  which,  even  if  it  was  absolutely  dominated  by  Moscow, 
at  least  formally  represented  all  of  the  parties.  The  Cominform 
evolved  in  the  field  of  real  and  apparent  Soviet  influence.  The 
clash  with  Yugoslavia  revealed  that  it  was  assigned  to  sub¬ 
ordinate  to  the  Soviet  government  those  Communist  states  and 
parties  which  had  begun  to  weaken  because  of  the  internal 
growth  of  national  Communism.  After  the  death  of  Stalin  the 


180  THE  NEW  CLA^S 

Cominform  was  finally  dissolved.  Even  the  Soviet  government, 
desiring  to  avoid  major  and  dangerous  quarrels,  accepted  the 
so-called  separate  path  to  socialism,  if  not  national  Communism 
itself. 

These  organizational  changes  had  profound  economic  and 
political  causes.  As  long  as  the  Communist  parties  in  East 
Europe  were  weak  and  the  Soviet  Union  was  not  sufficiently 
strong  economically,  the  Soviet  government  would  have  had 
to  resort  to  administrative  methods  to  subjugate  the  East 
European  countries,  even  if  there  had  been  no  Stalinist  arbi¬ 
trariness  and  despotism.  Soviet  imperialism,  by  political,  police 
and  military  methods,  had  to  compensate  for  its  own  economic 
and  other  weaknesses.  Imperialism  in  the  military  form,  which 
was  only  an  advanced  stage  of  the  old  Czarist  military-feudal 
imperialism,  also  corresponded  to  the  internal  structure  of  the 
Soviet  Union  in  which  the  police  and  administrative  apparatus, 
centralized  in  one  personality,  played  a  major  role.  Stalinism 
was  a  mixture  of  a  personal  Communist  dictatorship  and  mili¬ 
taristic  imperialism. 

These  forms  of  imperialism  developed:  joint  stock  com¬ 
panies,  absorption  of  the  exports  of  the  East  European  countries 
by  means  of  political  pressure  at  prices  below  the  world  market, 
artificial  formation  of  a  “socialist  world  market,”  control  of 
every  political  act  of  subordinate  parties  and  states,  transfor¬ 
mation  of  the  traditional  love  of  Communists  toward  the 
"socialist  fatherland”  into  deification  of  the  Soviet  state,  Stalin, 
and  Soviet  practices. 

But  what  happened? 

A  change  within  the  ruling  class  was  quietly  completed  in 
the  Soviet  Union  itself.  Similar  changes,  in  another  sense,  also 
occurred  in  the  East  European  countries;  new  national  bureauc¬ 
racies  long  for  ever  increasing  consolidation  of  power  and  prop¬ 
erty  relations,  but  at  the  same  time  they  fall  into  difficulties 
because  of  the  hegemonic  pressure  of  the  Soviet  government. 
If  earlier  they  had  had  to  renounce  national  characteristics 


NATIONAL  COMMUNISM 


181 


in  order  to  come  to  power,  now  such  action  had  become  a 
hindrance  to  their  further  ascendancy  to  power.  In  addition, 
it  became  impossible  for  the  Soviet  government  to  adhere  to 
the  exorbitant  and  hazardous  Stalinist  foreign  policy  of  mili¬ 
tary  pressure  and  isolation  and,  simultaneously,  during  the 
period  of  the  general  colonial  movements,  to  hold  the  Euro¬ 
pean  countries  in  infamous  bondage. 

The  Soviet  leaders  had  to  concede,  after  long  vacillation  and 
indecisive  argumentation,  that  the  Yugoslav  leaders  were 
falsely  indicted  as  Hitlerite  and  American  spies  just  because 
they  defended  the  right  to  consolidate  and  build  a  Communist 
system  in  their  own  way.  Tito  became  the  most  significant 
personality  in  contemporary  Communism.  The  principle  of 
national  Communism  was  formally  acknowledged.  But  with 
that  Yugoslavia  also  ceased  to  be  the  exclusive  creator  of  inno¬ 
vations  in  Communism.  The  Yugoslav  revolution  subsided  into 
its  groove,  and  a  peaceful  and  matter-of-fact  rule  began.  With 
that  the  love  between  yesterday’s  enemies  did  not  become 
greater,  nor  were  the  disagreements  terminated.  This  was 
merely  the  beginning  of  a  new  phase. 

Now  the  Soviet  Union  entered  into  the  predominantly  eco¬ 
nomic  and  political  phase  of  its  imperialistic  policy.  Or  so 
it  appears,  judging  from  current  facts. 

Today  national  Communism  is  a  general  phenomenon  in 
Communism.  To  varying  degrees  all  Communist  movements— 
except  that  of  the  U.S.S.R.  against  which  it  is  directed— are 
gripped  by  national  Communism.  In  its  time,  in  the  period  of 
Stalin’s  ascendancy,  Soviet  Communism  also  was  national  Com¬ 
munism.  At  that  time  Russian  Communism  abandoned  inter¬ 
nationalism,  except  as  an  instrument  of  its  foreign  policy. 
Today  Soviet  Communism  is  compelled,  even  if  indefinitely, 
to  acknowledge  a  new  reality  in  Communism. 

Changing  internally,  Soviet  imperialism  was  also  compelled 
to  alter  its  views  toward  the  external  world.  From  predomi¬ 
nantly  administrative  controls,  it  advanced  toward  gradual 


182 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


economic  integration  with  the  East  European  countries.  This 
is  being  accomplished  by  means  of  mutual  planning  in  impor¬ 
tant  branches  of  economy,  in  which  the  local  Communist 
governments  today  mainly  voluntarily  concur,  still  sensing 
themselves  weaker  externally  and  internally. 

Such  a  situation  cannot  remain  for  long,  because  it  conceals 
a  fundamental  contradiction.  On  the  one  hand  national  forms 
of  Communism  become  stronger,  but  on  the  other,  Soviet  im¬ 
perialism  does  not  diminsh.  Both  the  Soviet  government  and 
the  governments  of  the  East  European  countries,  including 
Yugoslavia,  by  means  of  accords  and  cooperation,  are  seeking 
solutions  to  mutual  problems  which  influence  their  very  nature 
—preservation  of  a  given  form  of  authority  and  of  property 
ownership.  However,  even  if  it  is  possible  to  effect  cooperation 
with  respect  to  property  ownership,  it  is  not  possible  with 
respect  to  authority.  Although  conditions  for  further  integra¬ 
tion  with  the  Soviet  Union  are  being  realized,  those  conditions 
which  lead  to  the  independence  of  the  East  European  Com¬ 
munist  governments  are  being  realized  even  more  rapidly.  The 
Soviet  Union  has  not  renounced  authority  in  these  countries, 
nor  have  the  governments  of  these  countries  renounced  their 
craving  to  attain  something  similar  to  Yugoslav  independence. 
The  degree  of  independence  that  will  be  attained  will  depend 
on  the  state  of  international  and  internal  forces. 

Recognition  of  national  forms  of  Communism,  which  the 
Soviet  government  did  with  clenched  teeth,  has  immense  sig¬ 
nificance  and  conceals  within  itself  very  considerable  dangers 
for  Soviet  imperialism. 

It  involves  freedom  of  discussion  to  a  certain  extent;  this 
means  ideological  independence  too.  Now  the  fate  of  certain 
heresies  in  Communism  will  depend  not  only  on  the  tolerance 
of  Moscow,  but  on  their  national  potentialities.  Deviation  from 
Moscow  that  strives  to  maintain  its  influence  in  the  Communist 
world  on  a  “voluntary”  and  “ideologic”  basis  cannot  possibly  be 
checked. 


NATIONAL  COMMUNISM  183 

Moscow  itself  is  no  longer  that  which  it  was.  It  single- 
handedly  lost  the  monopoly  of  the  new  ideas  and  the  moral 
right  to  prescribe  the  only  permissible  "line.”  Renouncing 
Stalin,  it  ceased  to  be  the  ideological  center.  In  Moscow  itself 
the  epoch  of  great  Communist  monarchs  and  of  great  ideas 
came  to  an  end,  and  the  reign  of  mediocre  Communist  bureau¬ 
crats  began. 

“Collective  leadership”  did  not  anticipate  that  any  difficulties 
and  failures  were  awaiting  it  in  Communism  itself— either  ex¬ 
ternally  or  internally.  But  what  could  it  do?  Stalin’s  imperial¬ 
ism  was  exorbitant  and  overly  dangerous,  and  what  was  even 
worse,  ineffective.  Under  him  not  only  the  people  generally, 
but  even  the  Communists,  grumbled,  and  they  did  so  at  the 
time  of  a  very  strained  international  situation. 

The  world  center  of  Communist  ideology  no  longer  exists; 
it  is  in  the  process  of  complete  disintegration.  The  unity  of 
the  world  Communist  movement  is  incurably  injured.  There 
are  no  visible  possibilities  whatsoever  that  it  can  be  restored. 
However,  just  as  the  shift  from  Stalin  to  “collective  leadership” 
did  not  alter  the  nature  of  the  system  itself  in  the  U.S.S.R.,  so 
too  national  Communism  has  been  unable,  despite  ever  increas¬ 
ing  possibilities  for  liberation  from  Moscow,  to  alter  its  in¬ 
ternal  nature,  which  consists  of  total  control  and  monopoly 
of  ideas,  and  ownership  by  the  party  bureaucracy.  Indeed,  it 
significantly  alleviated  the  pressure  and  slowed  down  the  rate 
of  establishment  of  its  monopoly  over  property,  particularly 
in  the  rural  areas.  But  national  Communism  neither  desires 
nor  is  able  to  transform  itself  into  something  other  than  Com¬ 
munism,  and  something  always  spontaneously  draws  it  toward 
its  source— toward  the  Soviet  Union.  It  will  be  unable  to  sepa¬ 
rate  its  fate  from  that  which  links  it  with  the  remaining  Com¬ 
munist  countries  and  movements. 

National  modifications  in  Communism  jeopardize  Soviet 
imperialism,  particularly  the  imperialism  of  the  Stalin  epoch, 
but  not  Communism  either  as  a  whole  or  in  essence.  On  the 


184 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


contrary,  where  Communism  is  in  control  these  changes  are 
able  to  influence  its  direction  and  even  to  strengthen  it  and 
make  it  acceptable  externally.  National  Communism  is  in  har¬ 
mony  with  non-dogmaticism,  that  is,  with  the  anti-Stalinist 
phase  in  the  development  of  Communism.  In  fact,  it  is  a  basic 
form  of  this  phase. 


3. 


National  Communism  is  unable  to  alter  the  nature  of  current 
international  relationships  between  states  or  within  workers’ 
movements.  But  its  role  in  these  relationships  may  be  of  great 
significance. 

Thus,  for  example,  Yugoslav  Communism,  as  a  form  of  na¬ 
tional  Communism,  played  an  extremely  important  role  in  the 
weakening  of  Soviet  Imperialism  and  in  the  downgrading  of 
Stalinism  inside  the  Communist  movement.  The  motives  for 
changes  which  are  occurring  in  the  Soviet  Union  and  in  the 
East  European  countries  are  to  be  found,  above  all,  in  the 
countries  themselves.  They  appeared  first  in  Yugoslavia— in  the 
Yugoslav  way.  And  there,  too,  they  were  first  completed.  Thus 
Yugoslav  Communism  as  national  Communism,  in  the  clash 
with  Stalin,  actually  originated  a  new,  post-Stalin  phase  in  the 
development  of  Communism.  Yugoslav  Communism  signifi¬ 
cantly  influenced  changes  in  Communism  itself,  but  did  not 
fundamentally  influence  either  international  relationships  or 
non-Communist  workers’  movements. 

The  expectation  that  Yugoslav  Communism  would  be  able 
to  evolve  toward  democratic  socialism  or  that  it  would  be 
able  to  serve  as  a  bridge  between  Social  Democracy  and  Com¬ 
munism  has  proved  baseless.  The  Yugoslav  leaders  themselves 
were  in  conflict  over  this  question.  During  the  time  of  Soviet 
pressure  on  Yugoslavia  they  demonstrated  a  fervent  desire  for 
a  rapprochement  with  the  Social  Democrats.  However,  in 
1956,  during  the  period  of  peace  with  Moscow,  Tito  announced 


NATIONAL  COMMUNISM 


18S 


that  both  the  Cominform  and  the  Socialist  International  were 
unnecessary,  despite  the  fact  that  the  Socialist  International 
unselfishly  defended  Yugoslavia  while  the  Cominform  labor¬ 
iously  attacked  Yugoslavia.  Preoccupied  with  a  pwlicy  of  so- 
called  active  coexistence,  which  for  the  most  part  corres{>onds 
to  their  interests  of  the  moment,  the  Yugoslav  leaders  declared 
that  both  organizations— the  Cominform  and  the  Socialist 
International— were  "immoderate”  solely  because  they  were 
allegedly  the  product  of  two  blocs. 

The  Yugoslav  leaders  confused  their  desires  with  reality  and 
confused  their  momentary  interests  with  profoundly  historic 
and  socialistic  differences. 

At  any  rate,  the  Cominform  was  the  product  of  Stalinist 
efforts  for  the  creation  of  an  Eastern  military  bloc.  It  is  impos¬ 
sible  to  deny  the  fact  that  the  Socialist  International  is  linked 
with  the  Western  bloc,  or  with  the  Atlantic  Pact,  since  it  oper¬ 
ates  within  the  framework  of  the  West  European  countries. 
But  it  would  exist  even  without  that  bloc.  It  is,  above  all,  an 
organization  of  Socialists  of  the  developed  European  countries 
in  which  political  democracy  and  similar  relationships  exist. 

Military  alliances  and  blocs  are  temjmrary  manifestations, 
but  the  Western  Socialism  and  Eastern  Communism  reflect 
much  more  enduring  and  basic  tendencies. 

Contrasts  between  Communism  and  a  Social  Democracy  are 
not  the  result  of  different  principles  only— these  least  of  all— 
but  of  the  opposing  directions  of  economic  and  intellectual 
forces.  The  clash  between  Martov  and  Lenin  at  the  Second 
Congress  of  Russian  Social  Democrats  in  London  in  1903  con¬ 
cerning  the  question  of  party  membership,  and  concerning  the 
question  of  lesser  or  greater  centralism  and  discipline  in  the 
party— which  Deutscher  correctly  calls  the  beginning  of  the 
greatest  schism  in  history— was  of  far  greater  significance  than 
even  its  initiators  were  able  to  anticipate.  With  that  began  not 
only  the  formation  of  two  movements  but  of  two  social  systems. 

The  schism  between  Communists  and  Social  Democrats  is 


186 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


impossible  to  bridge  until  the  very  natures  of  these  movements, 
or  the  conditions  themselves  which  resulted  in  differences  be¬ 
tween  them,  are  changed.  In  the  course  of  a  half  century, 
despite  periodic  and  separate  rapprochements,  the  differences 
have  on  the  whole  increased,  and  their  natures  have  become 
still  more  individualized.  Today  Social  Democracy  and  Com¬ 
munism  are  not  only  two  movements  but  two  worlds. 

National  Communism,  separating  itself  from  Moscow,  has 
been  unable  to  bridge  this  chasm  although  it  can  circumvent 
it.  This  was  demonstrated  by  the  cooperation  of  the  Yugoslav 
Communists  with  the  Social  Democrats,  which  was  more  seem¬ 
ing  than  actual  and  more  courteous  than  sincere,  and  which 
was  without  tangible  important  results  for  either  side. 

For  completely  different  reasons,  unity  has  not  even  been 
realized  between  Western  and  Asian  Social  Democrats.  The 
differences  between  them  were  not  as  great  in  essence,  or  in 
principle,  as  they  were  in  practice.  For  national  reasons  of  their 
own,  Asian  Socialists  had  to  remain  separated  from  West 
European  Socialists.  Even  when  they  are  opponents  of  colonial¬ 
ism,  Western  Socialists— though  they  play  no  leading  role— are 
representatives  of  countries  which,  solely  because  they  are  more 
developed,  exploit  the  undeveloped  countries.  The  contrast 
between  Asian  and  Western  Social  Democrats  is  a  manifestation 
of  contrasts  between  underdeveloped  and  developed  countries, 
carried  over  into  the  ranks  of  the  Socialist  movement.  Despite 
the  fact  that  concrete  forms  of  this  contrast  have  to  be  sharply 
defined,  proximity  in  essence— as  far  as  can  be  deduced  today— 
is  obvious  and  inevitable. 


4. 


National  Communism  similar  to  that  in  Yugoslavia  could 
be  of  immense  international  significance  in  Communist  parties 
of  non-Communist  states.  It  could  be  of  even  greater  signifi- 


NATIONAL  COMMONISM 


187 


cance  there  than  in  Communist  parties  which  are  actually 
in  power.  This  is  relevant  above  all  to  the  Communist  parties 
in  France  and  Italy,  which  encompass  a  significant  majority 
of  the  working  class  and  which  are,  along  with  several  parties 
in  Asia,  the  only  ones  of  major  significance  in  the  non-Com- 
munist  world. 

Until  now,  the  manifestations  of  national  Communism  in 
these  parties  have  been  without  major  significance  and  impetus. 
However,  they  have  been  inevitable.  They  could,  in  the  final 
analysis,  lead  to  profound  and  essential  changes  in  these  parties. 

These  parties  have  to  contend  with  the  Social  Democrats— 
who  are  able  to  channel  the  dissatisfied  masses  toward  them¬ 
selves  by  means  of  their  own  socialist  slogans  and  activity. 
This  is  not  the  only  reason  for  the  eventual  deviation  of  these 
parties  from  Moscow.  Lesser  reasons  may  be  seen  in  the  periodic 
and  unanticipated  reversals  of  Moscow  and  of  the  other  ruling 
Communist  parties.  Such  reversals  lead  these  and  other  non¬ 
ruling  Communist  parties  into  a  “crisis  of  conscience”— to  spit 
on  what  until  yesterday  they  extolled,  then  suddenly  to  change 
their  line.  Neither  oppositionist  propaganda  nor  administra¬ 
tive  pressure  will  play  a  fundamental  role  in  the  transformation 
of  these  parties. 

The  basic  causes  for  deviation  of  these  parties  from  Moscow 
may  be  found  in  the  nature  of  the  social  system  of  the  countries 
in  which  they  operate.  If  it  becomes  evident— and  it  appears 
likely— that  the  working  class  of  these  countries  is  able  through 
parliamentary  forms  to  arrive  at  some  improvement  in  its  posi¬ 
tion,  and  also  to  change  the  social  system  itself,  the  working 
class  will  abandon  the  Communists  regardless  of  its  revolu¬ 
tionary  and  other  traditions.  Only  small  groups  of  Communist 
dogmaticists  can  look  dispassionately  at  the  disassociation  of 
the  workers:  serious  political  leaders  in  a  given  nation  will 
endeavor  to  avoid  it  even  at  the  cost  of  weakening  ties  with 
Moscow. 

Parliamentary  elections  which  give  a  huge  number  of  votes 


188 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


to  Communists  in  these  countries  do  not  accurately  express 
the  actual  strength  of  Communist  parties.  To  a  significant  de¬ 
gree  they  are  an  expression  of  dissatisfaction  and  delusion. 
Stubbornly  following  the  Communist  leaders,  the  masses  will 
just  as  easily  abandon  them  the  moment  it  becomes  obvious  to 
them  that  the  leaders  are  sacrificing  national  institutions,  or 
the  concrete  prospects  of  the  working  class,  to  their  bureau¬ 
cratic  nature,  or  to  the  “dictatorship  of  the  proletariat”  and 
ties  with  Moscow. 

Of  course,  all  of  this  is  hypothesis.  But  even  today  these 
parties  are  finding  themselvs  in  a  difficult  situation.  If  they 
really  wish  to  be  adherents  of  parliamentarianism,  their  leaders 
will  have  to  renounce  their  anti-parliamentary  nature,  or 
change  over  to  their  own  national  Communism  which  would, 
since  they  are  not  in  control,  lead  to  disintegration  of  their 
parties. 

The  leaders  of  Communist  parties  in  these  countries  are 
driven  to  experiment  with  the  idea  of  national  Communism 
and  national  forms  by  all  of  these  factors:  by  the  strengthening 
of  the  possibility  that  the  transformation  of  society  and  the 
improvement  of  position  of  the  workers  will  be  attained  by 
democratic  means:  by  Moscow’s  reversals,  which  by  the  down¬ 
grading  of  the  cult  of  Stalin  ultimately  resulted  in  destruction 
of  the  ideologic  center;  by  concurrence  of  the'  Social  Democrats; 
by  tendencies  toward  unification  of  the  West  on  a  profound 
and  enduring  social  basis  as  well  as  a  military  one;  by  military 
strengthening  of  the  Western  bloc  which  offers  increasingly 
fewer  prospects  for  “brotherly  aid”  for  the  Soviet  army;  and  by 
the  impossibility  of  new  Communist  revolutions  without  a 
world  war.  At  the  same  time  fear  of  the  inevitable  result  of 
a  transition  to  parliamentarianism,  and  of  a  breaking  off  with 
Moscow,  prevents  these  leaders  from  doing  anything  of  real 
significance.  Increasingly  deeper  social  differences  between  the 
East  and  the  West  work  with  relentless  force.  The  clever 


NATIONAL  COMMUNISM 


189 


Togliatti  is  confused,  and  the  robust  Thorez  is  wavering.  Ex¬ 
ternal  and  internal  party  life  is  beginning  to  bypass  them. 

Emphasizing  that  today  a  parliament  can  serve  as  a  "form 
of  transition  to  socialism,”  Khrushchev  intended  at  the  Twen¬ 
tieth  Congress  to  facilitate  manipulation  of  the  Communist 
parties  in  "capitalist  countries,”  and  to  stimulate  the  cooper¬ 
ation  of  Communists  and  Social  Democrats  and  the  formation  of 
“People’s  Fronts.”  Something  like  this  appeared  realistic  to 
him,  according  to  his  words,  because  of  the  changes  which  had 
resulted  in  the  strengthening  of  Communism  and  because  of 
peace  in  the  world.  With  that  he  tacitly  acknowledged  to  every¬ 
one  the  obvious  impossibility  of  Communist  revolutions  in 
the  developed  countries,  as  well  as  the  impossibility  of  further 
expansion  of  Communism  under  current  conditions  without 
the  danger  of  a  new  world  war.  The  policy  of  the  Soviet  state 
has  been  reduced  to  a  status  quo,  while  Communism  has  de¬ 
scended  to  gradual  acquisition  of  new  positions  in  a  new  way. 

A  crisis  has  actually  begun  in  the  Communist  parties  of  the 
non-Communist  states.  If  they  change  over  to  national  Com¬ 
munism,  they  risk  forsaking  their  very  nature;  and  if  they  do 
not  change  over,  they  face  a  loss  of  followers.  Their  leaders, 
those  who  represent  the  spirit  of  Communism  in  these  parties, 
will  be  forced  into  the  most  cunning  manipulations  and  un¬ 
scrupulous  measures  if  they  are  to  extricate  themselves  from 
this  contradiction.  It  is  improbable  that  they  will  be  able  to 
check  disorientation  and  disintegration.  They  have  reached 
a  state  of  conflict  with  the  real  tendencies  of  development  in 
the  world  and  in  their  countries  that  obviously  lead  toward 
new  relationships. 

National  Communism  outside  of  the  Communist  states  in¬ 
evitably  leads  toward  renunciation  of  Communism  itself,  or 
toward  the  disintegration  of  the  Communist  parties.  Its  possi¬ 
bilities  are  greater  today  in  the  non-Communist  states,  but 
obviously,  only  along  the  lines  of  separation  from  Communism 


190 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


itself.  Therefore,  national  Communism  in  these  parties  will 
emerge  victorious  only  with  difficulty  and  slowly,  in  successive 
outbursts. 

In  the  Communist  parties  that  are  not  in  power  it  is  evident 
that  national  Communism— despite  its  intent  to  stimulate 
Communism  and  strengthen  its  nature— is  simultaneously  the 
heresy  that  nibbles  at  Communism  as  such.  National  Com¬ 
munism  per  se  is  contradictory.  Its  nature  is  the  same  as  that 
of  Soviet  Communism,  but  it  aspires  to  detach  itself  into  some¬ 
thing  of  its  own,  nationally.  In  reality,  national  Communism 
is  Communism  in  decline. 


The  Present-Day  World 


1. 


In  order  to  determine  more  clearly  the  international  position 
of  contemporary  Communism,  it  is  necessary  briefly  to  draw 
a  picture  of  the  present-day  world. 

The  results  of  the  First  World  War  led  to  the  transformation 
of  Czarist  Russia  into  a  new  type  of  state,  or  into  a  country 
with  new  types  of  social  relationships.  Internationally  the  dif¬ 
ference  between  the  technical  level  and  tempo  of  the  United 
States  and  the  countries  of  western  Europe  deepened;  the 
Second  World  War  was  to  transform  this  into  an  unbridgeable 
gulf,  so  that  only  the  United  States  did  not  undergo  major 
changes  in  the  structure  of  its  economy. 

Wars  were  not  the  only  cause  of  this  gulf  between  the  United 
States  and  the  rest  of  the  world;  they  only  accelerated  its  com¬ 
ing.  The  reasons  for  the  rapid  advancement  of  the  United  States 
can  be  found,  undoubtedly,  in  its  internal  potentialities— in 
the  natural  and  social  conditions  and  the  character  of  the 
economy.  American  capitalism  developed  in  different  circum¬ 
stances  from  European  capitalism  and  it  was  in  full  swing  at  a 
time  when  its  European  counterpart  had  already  begun  to 
decline. 

Today  the  gulf  is  this  wide:  6  per  cent  of  the  world  popula- 


191 


192 


THE  NEW  CLASS. 


tion,  that  of  the  United  States,  produces  40  per  cent  of  the 
goods  and  services  in  the  world.  Between  the  First  and  Second 
World  Wars  the  United  States  contributed  33  per  cent  of  world 
production:  after  the  Second  World  War  it  contributed  50 
per  cent.  The  opposite  was  true  of  Europe  (excluding  the 
U.S.S.R.),  whose  contribution  to  world  production  dropped 
from  68  per  cent  in  1870,  to  42  per  cent  in  the  1925-29  period, 
then  to  34  per  cent  in  1937,  and  to  25  per  cent  in  1948  (ac¬ 
cording  to  United  Nations  data) . 

The  development  of  modem  industry  in  colonial  economies 
was  also  of  special  importance,  and  it  was  to  make  it  possible 
for  most  of  them,  ultimately,  to  gain  their  freedom  after  the 
Second  World  War. 

In  the  period  between  the  First  and  Second  World  Wars 
capitalism  went  through  an  economic  crisis  so  profound  and 
with  consequences  so  great  that  only  dogma-ridden  Communist 
brains,  particularly  those  in  the  U.S.S.R.,  failed  to  acknowledge 
it.  In  contrast  to  the  crises  of  the  nineteenth  century,  the  great 
crisis  of  1929  revealed  that  such  cataclysms  today  signify  danger 
to  the  social  order  itself,  even  to  the  life  of  the  nation  as  a 
whole.  The  developed  countries— first  of  all  the  United  States— 
had  to  find  ways  to  emerge  from  this  crisis  gradually.  By  various 
methods  the  United  States  resorted  to  a  planned  economy  on 
a  national  scale.  The  changes  in  connection  with  this  were  of 
epochal  importance  for  the  developed  countries  and  for  the 
rest  of  the  world,  although  they  were  not  recognized  sufficiently 
from  a  theoretical  point  of  view. 

In  this  period  various  forms  of  totalitarianism  developed  in 
the  U.S.S.R.  and  in  capitalist  countries  such  as  Nazi  Germany. 

Germany,  in  contrast  to  the  United  States,  was  not  capable 
of  solving  the  problem  of  its  internal  and  external  expansion 
by  normal  economic  means.  War  and  totalitarianism  (Nazism) 
were  the  only  outlets  for  the  German  monopolists,  and  they 
subordinated  themselves  to  the  racist  war  party. 

As  we  have  seen,  the  U.S.S.R.  went  over  to  totalitarianism 


THE  PRESENT-DAY  WORLD 


193 


for  other  reasons.  It  was  the  condition  for  its  industrial  trans¬ 
formation. 

However,  there  was  another,  perhaps  not  very  obvious,  ele¬ 
ment  which  was  really  revolutionary  for  the  modern  world. 
This  element  was  modern  wars.  They  lead  to  substantial 
changes  even  when  they  do  not  lead  to  actual  revolutions. 
Leaving  frightful  devastation  behind  them,  they  change  both 
world  relations  and  relations  within  individual  countries. 

The  revolutionary  character  of  modern  wars  is  manifested 
not  only  in  the  fact  that  they  give  impetus  to  technical  dis¬ 
coveries,  but,  most  of  all,  in  the  fact  that  they  change  the 
economic  and  social  structure.  In  Great  Britain,  the  Second 
World  War  exposed  and  affected  relationships  to  the  extent 
that  considerable  nationalization  became  inevitable.  India,  Bur¬ 
ma,  and  Indonesia  emerged  from  the  war  as  independent 
countries.  The  unification  of  western  Europe  began  as  a  result 
of  the  war.  It  hurled  the  United  States  and  the  U.S.S.R.  to  the 
summit  as  the  two  major  economic  and  political  powers. 

Modem  warfare  affects  the  life  of  nations  and  humanity 
much  more  deeply  than  did  wars  of  earlier  epochs.  There  are 
two  reasons  for  this:  First,  modern  war  must  inevitably  be  total 
war.  Not  one  economic,  human,  or  other  source  can  remain 
untapped,  because  the  technical  level  of  production  is  already 
so  high  that  it  makes  it  impossible  for  parts  of  any  nation  or 
any  branch  of  the  economy  to  stand  to  one  side.  Second,  for 
the  same  technical,  economic,  and  other  reasons,  the  world,  to 
an  incomparably  larger  extent,  has  become  a  whole;  so  the 
smallest  changes  in  one  part  bring  forth  reactions  in  other 
parts  as  well.  Every  modern  war  tends  to  change  into  a  world 
war. 

These  invisible  military  and  economic  revolutions  are  of 
enormous  extent  and  significance.  They  are  more  spontaneous 
than  revolutions  achieved  by  force;  that  is,  they  are  not  bur¬ 
dened  to  as  great  an  extent  with  ideological  and  organizational 
elements.  Therefore,  such  revolutions  make  it  possible  to 


194 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


register  in  a  more  orderly  way  the  tendencies  of  movements  in 
the  modern  world. 

The  world  as  it  is  today  and  as  it  emerged  from  the  Second 
World  War  is  obviously  not  the  same  as  it  was  before. 

Atomic  energy,  which  man  has  tom  out  of  the  heart  of  matter 
and  wrested  from  the  cosmos,  is  the  most  spectacular  but  not 
the  only  sign  of  a  new  epoch. 

Official  Communist  prognostications  on  the  future  of  the 
human  race  declare  that  atomic  energy  is  the  symbol  of  Com¬ 
munist  society,  just  as  steam  was  the  symbol  and  the  power 
prerequisite  of  industrial  capitalism.  However  we  interpret 
this  naive  and  biased  reasoning,  another  point  is  tme:  atomic 
energy  is  already  leading  to  changes  in  individual  countries  and 
in  the  world  as  a  whole.  Certainly  these  changes  do  not  point 
toward  that  Communism  and  socialism  which  the  Communist 
“theoreticians”  desire. 

Atomic  energy,  as  a  discovery,  is  not  the  frait  of  one  nation, 
but  of  a  century  of  work  by  hundreds  of  the  most  brilliant 
minds  of  many  nations.  Its  application  is  also  the  result  of 
the  efforts— not  only  scientific  but  economic— of  a  number  of 
countries.  If  the  world  had  not  already  been  unified,  neither 
the  discovery  nor  the  application  of  atomic  energy  would  have 
been  possible. 

The  effect  of  atomic  energy,  in  the  first  place,  will  tend 
toward  the  further  unification  of  the  world.  On  the  way,  it 
will  shatter  inexorably  all  inherited  obstacles— ownership  rela¬ 
tions  and  social  relations,  but  above  all  exclusive  and  isolated 
systems  and  ideologies,  such  as  Communism  both  before  and 
after  Stalin’s  death. 


2. 


The  tendency  toward  the  unification  of  the  world  is  the  basic 
characteristic  of  our  time.  This  does  not  mean  that  the  world 


THE  PRESENT-DAY  WORLD 


195 


did  not  earlier  have  a  tendency  toward  unity,  in  a  different 
way.  The  tendency  toward  binding  the  world  together  by  means 
of  the  world  market  was  already  dominant  in  the  mid-nine¬ 
teenth  century.  It,  too,  was  an  epoch  of  capitalist  economies 
and  national  wars.  \Vorld  unity  of  one  kind  was  being  achieved 
then,  through  national  economies  and  national  wars. 

The  further  unification  of  the  world  was  effected  by  the 
shattering  of  pre  capitalist  forms  of  production  in  the  un¬ 
developed  regions  and  their  division  among  the  developed 
countries  and  their  monopolies.  This  was  the  period  of  mo¬ 
nopolistic  capitalism,  colonial  conquests,  and  wars  in  which 
internal  connections  and  interests  of  the  monopolies  often 
played  a  role  more  decisive  than  national  defense  itself.  The 
tendencies  at  that  time  toward  world  unity  were  achieved 
mainly  through  conflicts  and  associations  of  monopolistic  capi¬ 
tal.  This  was  a  higher  level  of  unity  than  unity  of  the  market. 
Capital  poured  out  of  national  sources,  penetrated,  took  hold, 
and  dominated  the  entire  world. 

The  present  tendencies  toward  unity  are  apparent  in  other 
areas.  They  may  be  found  in  a  very  high  level  of  production, 
in  contemporary  science,  and  in  scientific  and  other  thought. 
Further  advancement  of  unity  is  no  longer  possible  on  exclu¬ 
sively  national  foundations  or  through  the  division  of  the  world 
into  individual,  monopolistic  spheres  of  influence. 

The  trends  toward  this  new  unity— unity  of  production- 
are  being  built  on  the  foundations  already  attained  in  earlier 
stages— that  is,  on  the  unity  of  the  market  and  the  unity  of 
capital.  They  conflict,  however,  tvith  already  strained  and  in¬ 
adequate  national,  governmental,  and,  above  all,  social  rela¬ 
tions.  While  the  former  unities  were  achieved  by  means  of 
national  struggles  or  through  conflicts  and  wars  over  spheres 
of  interest,  contemporary  unity  is  being  formed,  and  can  only 
be  formed,  by  the  destruction  of  the  social  relationships  of 
previous  periods. 

No  one  can  say  conclusively  in  what  manner  the  coordina- 


196 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


tion  and  unification  of  world  production  will  be  effected, 
whether  by  war  or  by  peaceful  means.  But  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  its  tendency  cannot  be  checked. 

The  first  method  of  unification— war— would  hasten  unifica¬ 
tion  by  force,  that  is,  by  the  domination  of  one  or  another 
group.  But  it  would  inevitably  leave  behind  it  the  sparks  of 
new  conflagrations,  discord,  and  injustice.  Unification  by  means 
of  war  would  take  place  at  the  expense  of  the  weak  and  de¬ 
feated.  Even  if  war  should  bring  order  into  given  relationships 
it  would  leave  behind  it  unresolved  conflicts  and  deeper  mis¬ 
understandings. 

Because  the  present  world  conflict  is  unfolding  mainly  on 
the  basis  of  opposition  between  systems,  it  has  more  of  the 
character  of  a  class  conflict  than  of  opposition  between  nations 
and  states.  That  is  the  reason  for  its  unusual  severity  and 
sharpness.  Any  future  war  would  be  more  of  a  world  and  civil 
war  between  governments  and  nations.  Not  only  would  the 
course  of  the  war  itself  be  frightful;  its  effects  on  further  free 
development  would  be  terrible  too. 

The  unification  of  the  world  by  peaceful  means,  although 
a  slower  way,  is  the  only  steady,  wholesome,  and  just  way. 

It  appears  that  the  unification  of  the  contemporary  world 
will  be  effected  through  the  opposition  of  systems,  in  contrast 
to  the  types  of  opposition  (national)  through  which  unification 
was  achieved  in  earlier  periods. 

This  does  not  mean  that  all  contemporary  conflicts  are 
merely  due  to  conflicts  between  systems.  There  are  other 
conflicts,  including  those  from  former  epochs.  Through  the 
conflict  of  systems  the  tendency  toward  world  unity  o,f  produc¬ 
tion  is  revealing  itself  most  clearly  and  actively. 

It  would  be  unrealistic  to  expect  the  unity  of  world  produc¬ 
tion  to  be  achieved  in  the  near  future.  The  process  will  take  a 
long  time,  since  it  will  be  the  fruit  of  the  organized  efforts  of 
the  economic  and  other  leading  powers  of  humanity,  and  be¬ 
cause  complete  unity  of  production  actually  cannot  be  achieved. 


THE  PRESENT-DAY  WORLD 


197 


The  earlier  unities  were  never  attained  as  something  final;  this 
unity  too  is  being  established  only  as  a  tendency,  as  something 
toward  which  production,  at  least  that  of  the  most  developed 
countries,  aspires. 


3. 

The  ending  of  the  Second  World  War  had  already  confirmed 
the  tendency  to  division  of  systems  on  a  world  scale.  All  the 
countries  which  fell  under  Soviet  influence,  even  parts  of  coun¬ 
tries  (Germany,  Korea),  achieved  more  or  less  the  same  system. 
It  was  the  same  on  the  Western  side. 

The  Soviet  leaders  were  fully  aware  of  this  process.  I  re¬ 
member  that  at  an  intimate  party  in  1945  Stalin  said:  "In 
modern  war,  the  victor  will  impose  his  system,  which  was  not 
the  case  in  past  wars.”  He  said  this  before  the  war  was  over,  at 
a  time  when  love,  hope,  and  trust  were  at  their  peak  among 
the  Allies.  In  February  1948  he  said  to  us,  the  Yugoslavs,  and 
to  the  Bulgarians:  "They,  the  Western  powers,  will  make  a 
country  of  their  own  out  of  West  Germany  and  we  will  make 
one  of  our  own  out  of  East  Germany— this  is  inevitable.” 

Today  it  is  fashionable,  and  to  some  extent  justifiable,  to 
evaluate  Soviet  policy  as  it  was  before  and  after  Stalin’s  death. 
However,  Stalin  did  not  invent  the  systems,  nor  do  those  who 
succeeded  him  believe  in  them  less  than  he  did.  What  has 
changed  since  his  death  is  the  method  by  which  Soviet  leaders 
handle  relations  between  systems,  not  the  systems  themselves. 
Did  not  Khrushchev,  at  the  Twentieth  Party  Congress,  mention 
his  “world  of  socialism,”  his  “world  socialist  system,”  as  some¬ 
thing  separate  and  special?  In  practice  this  means  nothing  more 
than  insistence  upon  a  division  into  systems,  into  the  further 
exclusiveness  of  Communism’s  own  system  and  hegemonistic 
control. 

Because  the  conflict  between  the  West  and  East  is  essentially 


198 


THE  NEW  CLASS. 


a  conflict  of  systems,  it  must  take  on  the  appearance  of  an  ideo¬ 
logical  struggle.  Ideological  war  does  not  wane,  even  when 
temporary  compromises  are  effected,  and  it  drugs  into  uncon¬ 
sciousness  the  minds  in  the  opposing  camps.  The  more  the 
conflict  in  the  material,  economic,  political,  and  other  spheres 
sharpens,  the  more  it  seems  as  if  pure  ideas  themselves  were 
in  conflict. 

In  addition  to  the  exponents  of  Communism  and  capitalism 
there  is  a  third  type  of  country,  that  which  has  wrested  itself 
from  colonial  dependence  (India,  Indonesia,  Burma,  the  Arab 
countries,  etc.) .  These  countries  are  straining  to  construct  in¬ 
dependent  economies  in  order  to  tear  themselves  loose  from 
economic  dependence.  In  them  overlap  several  epochs  and  a 
number  of  systems,  and  particularly  the  two  contemptorary 
systems. 

These  emerging  nations  are,  principally  for  their  own  na¬ 
tional  reasons,  the  most  sincere  supporters  of  the  slogans  of 
national  sovereignty,  peace,  mutual  understanding,  and  sim¬ 
ilar  ideas.  However,  they  cannot  eliminate  the  conflict  between 
the  two  systems.  They  can  only  alleviate  it.  In  addition  they 
are  the  very  fields  of  battle  between  the  two  systems.  Their 
role  can  be  a  significant  and  noble  one  but,  for  the  present, 
not  a  decisive  one. 

It  is  important  to  observe  that  both  systems  claitn  that  the 
unification  of  the  world  will  be  modeled  on  one  or  the  other. 
Both  take  the  stand,  then,  that  there  is  a  need  for  world  unity. 
However,  these  stands  are  diametrically  opptosed.  The  modem 
world’s  tendency  toward  unity  is  being  demonstrated  and  re¬ 
alized  through  a  struggle  between  opposing  forces,  a  struggle 
of  unheard-of  severity  in  times  of  peace. 

The  ideological  and  political  expressions  of  this  struggle 
are,  as  we  know.  Western  democracy  and  Eastern  Communism. 

Since  the  unorganized  tendencies  toward  unification  are 
bursting  forth  more  strongly  in  the  West,  because  of  ptolitical 
democracy  and  a  higher  technical  and  cultural  level,  the  West 


THE  PRESENT-DAY  WORLD 


199 


also  appears  as  the  champion  of  political  and  intellectual 
freedom. 

One  or  another  characteristic  system  of  ownership  in  these 
countries  may  check  or  stimulate  this  tendency,  depending  upon 
circumstances.  However,  the  aspiration  toward  unity  is  wide¬ 
spread.  A  definite  obstacle  to  this  unification  is  the  monopolies. 
They  want  unity,  in  their  own  interests,  but  they  want  to  ac¬ 
complish  it  by  an  already  obsolete  method— in  the  form  of 
spheres  of  influence.  However,  their  opponents— for  example, 
the  English  Labourites— are  also  adherents  of  unity,  but  in  a  dif¬ 
ferent  way.  The  tendency  toward  unity  is  also  strong  in  Great 
Britain,  which  has  carried  out  nationalization.  Moreover,  the 
United  States  is  carrying  out  nationalization  as  well,  on  an  even 
vaster  scale,  not  by  changing  the  form  of  ownership,  but  by  put¬ 
ting  a  considerable  portion  of  the  national  income  into  the 
hands  of  the  government.  If  the  United  States  should  achieve  a 
completely  nationalized  economy,  tendencies  toward  the  uni¬ 
fication  of  the  contemporary  world  would  receive  still  greater 
impetus. 


4. 


The  law  of  society  and  man  is  to  expand  and  perfect  pro 
duction.  This  law  evidences  itself  in  the  contemporary  level 
of  science,  technology,  thought,  etc.,  as  a  tendency  toward  the 
unification  of  world  production.  This  is  a  tendency  which,  as 
a  rule,  is  so  much  more  irresistible  if  it  involves  people  on  a 
higher  cultural  and  material  level. 

Western  tendencies  toward  world  unification  are  the  expres¬ 
sion  of  economic,  technical,  and  other  needs  and,  behind  these, 
of  political  ownership  and  other  forces.  The  picture  in  the 
Soviet  camp  is  different.  Even  if  there  had  not  been  other 
reasons,  the  Communist  East,  because  it  was  more  backward, 
would  have  been  compelled  to  Isolate  itself  economically  and 


200  THE  NEW  CLASS 

ideologically  and  to  compensate  for  its  economic  and  other 
weaknesses  by  political  measures. 

It  may  sound  strange,  but  this  is  true:  Communism’s  so- 
called  socialist  ownership  is  the  main  obstacle  to  world  unifi¬ 
cation.  The  collective  and  total  dominance  of  the  new  class 
creates  an  isolated  political  and  economic  system  which  impedes 
the  unification  of  the  world.  This  system  can  and  does  change, 
but  very  slowly,  and  almost  not  at  all  in  regard  to  mixing  and 
interweaving  with  other  systems  in  the  direction  of  consolida¬ 
tion.  Its  changes  are  made  solely  for  the  purpose  of  increasing 
its  own  strength.  Leading  to  one  type  of  ownership,  government, 
and  ideas,  this  system  inevitably  isolates  itself.  It  inevitably 
moves  toward  exclusiveness. 

A  united  world  which  even  the  Soviet  leaders  desire  can  only 
be  imagined  by  them  as  more  or  less  identical  with  their  own 
and  as  being  theirs.  The  peaceful  coexistence  of  systems  of 
which  they  speak  does  not  mean  to  them  the  interweaving  of 
various  systems,  but  the  static  continuation  of  one  system  along¬ 
side  another,  until  the  point  when  the  other  system— the  cap¬ 
italist  system— is  either  defeated  or  corrodes  from  within. 

The  existence  of  the  conflict  between  the  two  systems 
does  not  mean  that  national  and  colonial  conflicts  have  ceased. 
On  the  contrary,  it  is  through  clashes  of  a  national  and  colonial 
nature  that  the  basic  conflict  of  systems  is  revealed.  The  struggle 
over  the  Suez  Canal  could  hardly  be  kept  from  turning  into 
strife  betwen  the  two  systems,  instead  of  remaining  what  it 
was:  a  dispute  between  Egyptian  nationalism  and  world  trade 
which,  by  a  coincidence,  happened  to  be  represented  by  the 
old  colonial  powers  of  Britain  and  France. 

Extreme  strain  in  all  aspects  of  international  life  has  been 
the  inevitable  result  of  such  relations.  Cold  war  has  become 
the  normal  peacetime  state  of  the  modem  world.  Its  forms 
have  changed  and  are  changing:  it  becomes  milder  or  more 
severe,  but  it  is  no  longer  possible  to  eliminate  it  under  given 
conditions.  It  is  necessary  first  to  eliminate  something  much 


201 


THE  PRESENT-DAY  WORLD 
deeper,  something  which  is  in  the  nature  of  the  contemporary 
world,  of  contemporary  systems,  and  especially  of  Communism. 
The  cold  war,  today  the  cause  of  increasing  tension,  was  itself 
the  product  of  other,  deeper,  and  earlier  conflicting  factors. 

The  world  in  which  we  live  is  a  world  of  uncertainty.  It  is 
a  world  of  stupefying  and  unfathomable  horizons  which  science 
is  revealing  to  humanity;  it  is  also  a  world  of  terrible  fear  of 
cosmic  catastrophe,  threatened  by  modem  means  of  war. 

This  world  will  be  changed,  in  one  way  or  another.  It  cannot 
remain  as  it  is,  divided  and  with  an  irresistible  aspiration  to¬ 
ward  unity.  World  relationships  which  finally  emerge  from 
this  entanglement  will  be  neither  ideal  nor  without  friction. 
However,  they  will  be  better  than  the  present-day  ones. 

The  present  conflict  of  systems,  however,  does  not  indicate 
that  humanity  is  going  in  the  direction  of  a  single  system.  This 
type  of  conflict  demonstrates  only  that  the  further  unification 
of  the  world  or,  more  accurately  expressed,  the  unification  of 
world  production,  will  be  achieved  through  the  conflict  between 
systems. 

The  tendency  toward  unity  of  world  production  cannot  lead 
everywhere  to  the  same  type  of  production,  that  is,  to  the  same 
forms  of  ownership,  government,  etc.  This  unity  of  production 
expresses  the  aspiration  toward  elimination  of  inherited  and 
artificial  obstacles  to  the  flourishing  and  greater  efficiency  of 
modem  production.  It  means  a  fuller  adjustment  of  production 
to  local,  natural,  national,  and  other  conditions.  The  tendency 
toward  this  unification  really  leads  to  a  greater  coordination 
and  use  of  the  world  production  potential. 

It  is  fortunate  that  a  single  system  does  not  prevail  in  the 
world.  On  the  contrary,  the  unfortunate  thing  is  that  there 
are  too  few  different  systems.  Most  of  all,  what  is  really  bad 
is  the  exclusive  and  isolated  nature  of  systems,  of  whatever  kind 
they  may  be. 

Increasingly  greater  differences  between  social  units,  state 
and  political  systems,  in  addition  to  increasingly  greater  efB- 


202 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


ciency  of  production,  is  one  of  the  laws  of  society.  Peoples  unite, 
man  conforms  more  and  more  to  the  world  around  him,  but 
at  the  same  time  he  also  becomes  more  and  more  individualized. 

The  future  world  will  probably  be  more  varied,  and,  as 
such,  more  unified.  Its  imminent  unification  will  be  made 
possible  by  variety,  not  by  sameness  of  type  and  personality.  At 
least  that  is  the  way  it  has  been  up  to  this  time.  Sameness  of 
type  and  personality  would  mean  slavery  and  stagnation;  not 
a  higher  degree  of  freedom  for  production  than  today’s. 

A  nation  which  does  not  become  aware  of  actual  world 
processes  and  tendencies  will  have  to  pay  for  it  dearly.  It  will 
inevitably  lag  behind  and  in  the  end  will  have  to  adjust  to 
the  unification  of  the  world,  no  matter  what  its  numerical  and 
military  strength  may  be.  None  will  escape  this,  just  as  in  the 
past  not  one  nation  could  resist  the  penetration  of  capital  and 
the  connection  with  other  nations  through  the  world  market. 

That  is  also  the  reason  why  today  every  autarchical,  or 
exclusive,  national  economy— whatever  its  form  of  ownership 
or  political  order,  or  even  its  technical  level— must  fall  into 
unresolvable  contradictions  and  stagnation.  This  holds  true  also 
for  social  systems,  ideas,  etc.  The  isolated  system  can  offer  only 
a  very  modest  living;  it  would  be  unable  to  move  forward  and 
solve  the  problems  brought  about  by  modern  techniques  and 
modem  ideas. 

Incidentally,  world  development  has  already  demolished  the 
Communist-Stalinist  theory  of  the  possibility  of  constmction 
of  a  socialist,  or  Communist,  society  in  one  country,  and  has 
brought  about  the  strengthening  of  the  totalitarian  despotism, 
or  the  absolute  dominance  of  a  new  exploiting  class. 

In  these  circumstances  the  construction  of  a  socialist,  or  Com¬ 
munist,  or  any  other  kind  of  society  in  one  country,  or  in  a 
large  number  of  countries  cut  off  from  the  world  as  a  whole,  in¬ 
evitably  results  in  autarchy  and  the  consolidation  of  despotism. 
It  also  causes  the  weakening  of  the  national  potentialities  for 


THE  PRESENT-DAY  WORLD  2()S 

economic  and  social  progress  of  the  countries  concerned.  It 
is  possible  to  have,  in  harmony  with  progressive  economic  and 
democratic  aspirations  in  the  world,  more  bread  and  liberty 
for  people  generally,  a  more  just  distribution  of  goods,  and  a 
normal  tempo  of  economic  development.  The  condition  for 
this  is  the  changing  of  existing  property  and  political  relation¬ 
ships,  particularly  those  in  Communism  since  they  are,  because 
of  the  monopoly  of  the  ruling  class,  the  most  serious— although 
not  the  only— obstacle  to  national  and  world  progress. 


5. 


The  tendency  toward  unification,  for  other  reasons,  has  also 
influenced  changes  in  property  relationships. 

The  increased,  and  even  decisive,  role  of  government  organs 
in  the  economy,  and  to  a  large  extent  in  ownership  as  well, 
is  also  an  expression  of  the  tendency  toward  world  unification. 
Certainly  it  is  manifested  in  different  ways  in  various  systems 
and  countries,  and  even  as  an  obstacle  in  those  places  where¬ 
as  in  the  Communist  countries— formal  state  ownership  itself 
conceals  the  monopoly  and  the  total  domination  of  a  new  class. 

In  Great  Britain  private  or,  more  accurately  expressed,  mon¬ 
opolist  ownership  has  already  legally  lost  its  sanctity  and  purity 
through  Labourite  nationalization.  Over  twenty  per  cent  of 
British  productive  power  has  been  nationalized.  In  the  Scandi¬ 
navian  countries,  in  addition  to  state  ownership,  a  cooperative 
type  of  collective  ownership  is  developing. 

The  increasing  role  of  government  in  the  economy  is  espe¬ 
cially  characteristic  of  the  countries  which  until  recently  were 
colonies  and  semi-dependent  countries,  without  regard  to 
whether  they  have  a  socialist  government  (Burma) ,  a  parlia¬ 
mentary  democracy  (India),  or  a  military  dictatorship  (Egypt). 


204 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


The  government  makes  most  of  the  investments;  it  controls 
exports,  seizes  a  large  portion  of  the  export  funds,  etc.  The 
government  appears  everywhere  as  an  initiator  of  economic 
change,  and  nationalization  is  a  more  frequently  occurring 
form  of  ownership. 

The  situation  is  no  different  in  the  United  States,  the  coun¬ 
try  where  capitalism  is  most  highly  developed.  Not  only  can 
everybody  see  the  increasing  role  of  the  government  in  the 
economy  from  the  great  crisis  (1929)  to  the  present  time,  but 
few  people  deny  the  inevitability  of  this  role. 

James  Blaine  Walker  emphasizes,  in  The  Epic  of  American 
Industry:*  “The  growing  intimacy  between  government  and 
the  economic  life  has  been  one  of  the  striking  characteristics 
of  the  twentieth  century.” 

Walker  cites  that  in  1938  about  20  per  cent  of  the  national 
income  was  socialized,  while  in  1940  this  percentage  went  up 
to  at  least  25  per  cent.  Systematic  government  planning  of  the 
national  economy  began  with  Roosevelt.  At  the  same  time,  the 
number  of  government  workers  and  government  functions, 
particularly  those  of  the  federal  government,  is  growing. 

Johnson  and  Kross,  in  The  Origins  and  Development  of  the 
American  Economy, f  come  to  the  same  conclusions.  They  af¬ 
firm  that  administration  has  been  separated  from  ownership 
and  that  the  role  of  the  government  as  a  creditor  has  grown 
considerably.  “One  of  the  chief  characteristics  of  the  20th  cen¬ 
tury,”  they  say,  “is  the  constant  augmentation  of  the  govern¬ 
ment’s,  especially  the  federal  government’s,  influence  over 
economic  affairs.” 

In  his  work  The  American  Way,i  Shepard  B.  Clough  cites 
figures  that  illustrate  these  statements.  The  expenditures  and 
public  debts  of  the  federal  government,  according  to  him,  look 
like  this: 

•  New  York,  Harper,  1949. 

t  New  York,  Prentice-Hall,  1955. 

t  New  York,  T.  Y.  CroweU,  1953. 


THE  PRESENT-DAY  WORLD 


203 


Expenditures  of  the  Federal 
Government 

Public  Debts 
(Federal) 

Year 

(in  millions  of  dollars) 

(in  thousands  of  dollars) 

1870 

309.6 

2,436,453 

1940 

8,998.1 

42,967,531 

1950 

40,166.8 

256,708,000 

In  this  work  Clough  speaks  of  the  “managerial  revolution,” 
which  he  understands  to  be  the  rise  of  professional  adminis¬ 
trators,  without  whom  owners  can  no  longer  operate.  Their 
number,  role,  and  solidarity  are  continually  growing  in  the 
United  States,  and  men  of  great  business  genius,  like  John  D. 
Rockefeller,  John  Wanamaker,  Charles  Schwab  and  others,  do 
not  emerge  any  longer  in  the  United  States. 

Fainsod  and  Gordon,  in  Government  and  the  American 
Economy*  remark  that  the  government  has  already  played  a 
role  in  the  economy  and  that  various  social  groups  have  tried 
to  make  use  of  this  role  in  economic  life.  However,  there  are 
now  essential  differences  in  this.  The  regulative  role  of  govern¬ 
ment,  they  write,  has  appeared  not  only  in  the  sphere  of  labor 
but  in  production— in  branches  of  the  economy  as  important 
to  the  nation  as  transportation,  natural  gas,  coal,  and  petroleum. 
“Novel  and  far-reaching  changes  were  also  evident  in  the  form 
of  an  expansion  of  public  enterprise  and  increased  concern 
with  the  conservation  of  natural  and  human  resources.  Public 
enterprise  became  particularly  important  in  the  banking  and 
credit  field,  in  electricity,  and  in  the  provision  of  low-cost 
housing.”  They  comment  that  the  government  has  begun  to 
play  a  far  more  important  role  than  it  played  half  a  century 
ago,  even  ten  years  ago.  “The  result  of  these  developments 
has  been  to  produce  a  ‘mixed  economy,’  an  economy  in  which 
public  enterprise,  partially  government-controlled  private  en- 


New  York,  W.  W.  Norton,  1941. 


206 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


terprise,  and  relatively  uncontrolled  private  enterprise  all  exist 
side  by  side.” 

These  and  other  authors  cite  various  aspects  of  this  process 
and  the  growth  of  the  needs  of  society  for  social  welfare,  edu¬ 
cation,  and  similar  benefits,  which  are  being  provided  by  gov¬ 
ernment  agencies,  as  well  as  the  continual  increase— both 
relative  and  absolute— in  the  number  of  persons  employed  by 
the  government. 

It  is  understandable  that  this  process  received  immense  im¬ 
petus  and  intensity  during  the  Second  World  War  because  of 
military  needs.  However,  after  the  war  the  process  did  not 
subside  but  continued  at  a  faster  tempo  than  during  the  prewar 
period.  It  was  not  just  the  fact  that  the  Democratic  Party  was 
in  power.  Even  the  Republican  government  of  Eisenhower, 
which  was  elected  to  power  in  1952  on  the  slogan  of  a  return 
to  private  initiative,  could  not  change  anything  essentially. 
The  same  thing  happened  with  the  Conservative  government 
in  Great  Britain;  it  did  not  succeed  in  bringing  about  de¬ 
nationalization  except  in  the  steel  industry.  Its  role  in  the 
economy,  by  comparison  with  that  of  the  Labour  government, 
has  not  essentially  decreased,  although  it  has  not  increased 
either. 

The  interference  of  the  government  in  the  economy  is  ob¬ 
viously  the  result  of  objective  tendencies  which  had  already 
penetrated  the  people’s  consciousness  a  long  time  ago.  All 
serious  economists,  beginning  with  Keynes,  have  advocated  the 
intervention  of  the  state  in  the  economy.  Now  this  is  more  or 
less  an  actuality  throughout  the  world.  State  intervention  and 
state  ownership  are  today  an  essential  and  in  some  places  a 
determining  factor  in  the  economy. 

One  could  almost  conclude  from  this  that  there  is  no  distinc¬ 
tion  or  source  of  conflict  in  the  fact  that  in  the  Eastern  system 
the  state  plays  the  major  role,  while  in  the  Western  system 
private  ownership,  or  ownership  by  monopolies  and  companies, 
plays  a  major  role.  Such  a  conclusion  seems  all  the  more  war- 


207 


THE  PRESENT-DAY  WORLD 
ranted  since  the  role  of  private  ownership  in  the  West  is 
gradually  declining,  the  role  of  the  state  growing. 

However,  this  is  not  the  case.  Aside  from  the  other  differ¬ 
ences  between  systems,  there  is  an  essential  difference  in  state 
ownership  and  in  the  role  of  the  state  in  the  economy.  Though 
state  ownership  is  technically  present  to  some  extent  in  both 
systems,  they  are  two  different,  even  contradictory  types  of 
ownership.  This  applies  to  the  role  of  the  state  in  the  economy, 
too. 

Not  a  single  Western  government  acts  like  an  owner  with 
relation  to  the  economy.  In  fact,  a  Western  government  is 
neither  the  owner  of  nationalized  property  nor  the  owner  of 
funds  which  it  has  collected  through  taxes.  It  cannot  be  an 
owner  because  it  is  subject  to  change.  It  must  administer  and 
distribute  this  property  under  the  control  of  a  parliament.  In 
the  course  of  distribution  of  property,  the  government  is  sub¬ 
ject  to  various  influences,  but  it  is  not  the  owner.  All  it  does 
is  administer  and  distribute,  well  or  badly,  property  which  does 
not  belong  to  it. 

This  is  not  the  case  in  Communist  countries.  The  govern¬ 
ment  both  administers  and  distributes  national  property.  The 
new  class,  or  its  executive  organ— the  party  oligarchy— both 
acts  as  the  owner  and  is  the  owner.  The  most  reactionary  and 
bourgeois  government  can  hardly  dream  of  such  a  monopoly 
in  the  economy. 

Surface  similarities  in  ownership  in  the  West  and  the  East 
are  in  fact  real  and  deep  differences,  even  conflicting  elements. 


6. 


Even  after  the  First  World  War,  forms  of  ownership  were 
probably  an  essential  reason  for  the  conflicts  between  the  West 
and  the  U.S.S.R.  Monopolies  then  played  a  much  more  im¬ 
portant  role  and  they  could  not  accept  the  idea  that  one  part 


208 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


of  the  world— specifically  the  U.S.S.R.— was  escaping  from  their 
domain.  The  Communist  bureaucracy  had  just  recently  become 
the  ruling  class. 

Ownership  relationships  have  always  been  vital  to  the 
U.S.S.R.  in  its  dealings  with  other  countries.  Wherever  possible 
its  peculiar  type  of  ownership  and  political  relationship  was 
imposed  by  force.  No  matter  how  much  it  developed  its  busi¬ 
ness  connections  with  the  rest  of  the  world,  it  could  not  go 
beyond  the  mere  exchange  of  goods,  which  had  been  developed 
during  the  period  of  national  states.  This  was  also  true  of 
Yugoslavia  in  the  period  of  its  break  with  Moscow.  Yugoslavia 
could  not  develop  any  kind  of  significant  economic  cooperation 
except  for  the  exchange  of  goods,  although  she  had  and  con¬ 
tinues  to  have  hopes  of  achieving  this.  Her  economy  has  re¬ 
mained  isolated  too. 

There  are  other  elements  which  complicate  this  picture  and 
these  relationships.  If  the  strengthening  of  Western  tendencies 
toward  world  unity  of  production  might  not  mean  aid  to  unde¬ 
veloped  countries,  in  practice  it  would  lead  to  the  ascendancy 
of  one  nation— the  United  States— or,  at  best,  a  group  of  nations. 

By  the  very  element  of  exchange,  the  economy  and  the 
national  life  of  the  undeveloped  countries  are  exploited  and 
'breed  to  be  subordinated  to  the  developed  countries.  This 
means  that  the  undeveloped  countries  can  only  defend  them¬ 
selves  by  political  means,  and  by  shutting  themselves  in  if  they 
wish  to  survive.  This  is  one  way.  The  other  way  is  to  receive 
aid  from  the  outside,  from  the  developed  countries.  There  is 
no  third  way.  Up  to  now  there  has  been  barely  the  beginning 
along  the  second  way— aid  in  insignificant  amounts. 

Today  the  difference  between  the  American  and  the  Indo¬ 
nesian  worker  is  greater  than  that  between  the  American 
worker  and  the  wealthy  American  stockholder.  In  1949  every 
inhabitant  of  the  United  States  earned  an  average  of  at  least 
$1,440.00;  the  Indonesian  worker  earned  l/53rd  as  much,  only 
$27.00,  according  to  United  Nations  data.  And  there  is  general 


THE  PRESENT-DAY  WORLD 


209 


agreement  that  the  material  and  other  differences  between  de¬ 
veloped  and  undeveloped  countries  do  not  diminish;  on  the 
contrary,  they  increase. 

The  inequality  between  the  Western  developed  countries 
and  the  undeveloped  countries  reveals  itself  as  being  mainly 
economic.  Traditional  political  domination  by  governors  and 
local  lords  is  already  on  its  way  out.  Now,  as  a  rule,  the  economy 
of  an  undeveloped  but  politically  independent,  national  gov¬ 
ernment  is  subordinate  to  some  other  country. 

Today  no  single  people  can  willingly  accept  such  subordinate 
relationships,  just  as  no  single  people  can  willingly  renounce 
the  advantages  made  possible  by  greater  productivity. 

To  ask  American  or  West  European  workers— not  to  mention 
owners— willingly  to  renounce  the  benefits  offered  them  by  a 
high  level  of  technology  and  more  productive  work  is  as  un¬ 
thinkable  as  it  would  be  to  persuade  a  poor  Asiatic  that  he 
should  be  happy  that  he  receives  so  little  for  his  work. 

Mutual  aid  between  governments  and  the  gradual  elimina¬ 
tion  of  economic  and  other  inequalities  between  peoples  must 
be  bom  of  need  in  order  to  become  the  child  of  good  will. 

In  the  main,  economic  aid  has  thus  far  been  extended  only 
in  those  cases  where  undeveloped  countries,  with  low  purchas¬ 
ing  power  and  low  production,  have  become  a  burden  to  the 
developed  countries.  The  current  conflict  between  the  two  sys¬ 
tems  is  the  main  obstacle  to  the  extension  of  real  economic 
aid.  This  is  not  only  because  huge  sums  are  being  spent  for 
military  and  similar  needs;  contemporary  relationships  also 
hinder  the  flourishing  of  production,  and  its  tendency  toward 
unification,  thus  blocking  aid  to  underdeveloped  countries  and 
the  progress  of  the  developed  countries  themselves. 

Material  and  other  differences  between  the  developed  and 
the  undeveloped  .countries  have  also  been  registered  in  their 
internal  life.  It  would  be  completely  inaccurate  to  interpret 
democracy  in  the  West  only  as  an  expression  of  solidarity  of 
rich  nations  in  looting  the  poor  ones;  the  Western  countries 


210 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


were  democratic  long  before  the  time  of  colonial  extra-profits, 
though  on  a  lower  le\  el  than  that  of  today.  The  only  connection 
between  present-day  democracy  in  the  ^Vestern  countries  and 
that  of  the  period  when  Marx  and  Lenin  were  alive  lies  in 
the  fact  of  continuous  development  between  the  two  periods. 
The  similarity  between  past  and  present  democracy  is  not 
greater  than  that  between  liberal  or  monopolistic  capitalism 
and  modern  statism. 

In  his  work,  In  Place  of  Fear,  the  British  socialist  Aneurin 
Bevan  observed: 

It  is  necessary  to  distinguish  between  the  intention  of  Lib¬ 
eralism  and  its  achievements.  Its  intention  was  to  win  power 
for  the  new  forms  of  property  thrown  up  by  the  Industrial 
Revolution.  Its  achievement  was  to  win  political  power  for 
the  people  irrespective  of  property.* 

.  .  The  function  of  parliamentary  democracy,  under  uni¬ 
versal  franchise,  historically  considered,  is  to  expose  wealth- 
privilege  to  the  attack  of  the  people.  It  is  a  sword  pointed  at 
the  heart  of  property-power.  The  arena  where  the  issues  are 
joined  is  Parliament.j- 

Bevan’s  observation  applies  to  Great  Britain.  It  could  be 
expanded  to  apply  to  other  Western  countries,  but  only  to  the 
Western  ones. 

In  the  West,  economic  means  which  operate  toward  world 
unification  have  become  dominant.  In  the  East,  on  the  Com¬ 
munist  side,  political  means  for  such  unification  have  always 
been  predominant.  The  U.S.S.R.  is  capable  of  “uniting"  only 
that  which  it  conquers.  From  this  point  of  view  not  even  the 
new  regime  could  change  anything  essentially.  According  to 
its  ideas,  oppressed  peoples  are  only  those  on  whom  some  other 
government,  not  the  Soviet  one,  is  inflicting  its  rule.  The  Soviet 

•  From  page  9,  New  York  edition,  Simon  &  Schuster,  1952. 
t  From  page  6,  ibid. 


THE  PRESENT-DAY  WORLD 


211 


government  subordinates  its  aid  to  others,  even  in  the  case  ol 
loans,  to  its  political  requirements. 

The  Soviet  economy  has  not  yet  reached  the  point  which 
would  drive  it  to  world  unification  of  production.  Its  contra¬ 
dictions  and  difficulties  stem  mainly  from  internal  sources.  The 
system  itself  can  still  survive  despite  its  isolation  from  the 
outside  world.  This  is  enormously  expensive,  but  it  is  achieved 
by  the  widespread  use  of  force.  But  this  situation  cannot  last 
long:  the  limit  must  be  reached.  And  this  will  be  the  beginning 
of  the  end  of  unlimited  domination  by  the  political  bureauc¬ 
racy,  or  by  the  new  class. 

Contemporary  Communism  could  help  achieve  the  goal  of 
world  unification  most  of  all  by  political  means— by  internal 
democratization  and  by  becoming  more  accessible  to  the  outside 
world.  However,  it  is  still  remote  from  this.  Is  it  actually  capa¬ 
ble  of  such  a  thing? 

What  kind  of  picture  does  Communism  have  of  itself  and 
of  the  outside  world? 

Once,  during  the  period  of  monopolies,  the  Marxism  which 
Lenin  modified  conceived  the  internal  and  external  relation¬ 
ships  into  which  Czarist  Russia  and  similar  countries  had  fallen 
with  a  degree  of  accuracy.  With  this  picture  to  spur  it  on,  the 
movement  headed  by  Lenin  fought  and  won.  In  Stalin’s  time 
this  same  ideology,  again  modified,  was  realistic  to  the  extent 
that  it  defined,  almost  accurately,  the  position  and  role  of  the 
new  state  in  international  relations.  The  Soviet  state,  or  the 
new  class,  was  in  a  good  position  externally  and  internally, 
subordinating  to  itself  all  that  it  could  acquire. 

Now  the  Soviet  leaders  have  a  hard  time  orienting  them¬ 
selves.  They  are  no  longer  capable  of  seeing  contemporary 
reality.  The  world  which  they  see  is  not  the  one  that  really 
exists.  It  is  either  the  one  that  used  to  exist  or  the  one  that 
they  would  wish  to  have  exist. 

Holding  on  to  obsolete  dogmas,  the  Communist  leaders 
thought  that  all  the  rest  of  the  world  would  stagnate  and  de- 


212  THE  NEW  CLASS 

stroy  itielf  in  conflicts  and  struggles.  This  did  not  happen. 
The  West  advanced  both  economically  and  intellectually.  It 
proved  to  be  united  whenever  danger  from  another  system 
threatened.  The  colonies  were  freed,  but  did  not  become  Com¬ 
munist,  nor  did  this  lead  to  a  rupture  with  the  mother  coun¬ 
tries  involved. 

The  breakdown  of  Western  capitalism  through  crises  and 
wars  did  not  take  place.  In  1949  Vishinsky,  at  the  United  Na¬ 
tions,  in  the  name  of  the  Soviet  leadership,  predicted  the 
beginning  of  a  great  new  crisis  in  the  United  States  and  in 
capitalism.  The  opposite  happened.  This  was  not  because  capi¬ 
talism  is  good  or  bad,  but  because  the  capitalism  the  Soviet 
leaders  rant  about  no  longer  exists.  The  Soviet  leaders  could 
not  see  that  India,  the  Arab  states,  and  similar  countries  had 
become  independent,  until  they  began  to  approve— for  their 
own  reasons— Soviet  points  of  view  in  foreign  policy.  The  Soviet 
leaders  did  not  and  do  not  now  understand  social  democracy. 
Instead,  they  measure  it  by  the  yardstick  with  which  they 
measure  the  fate  of  the  Social  Democrats  in  their  own  area. 
Basing  their  thinking  on  the  fact  that  their  country  did  not 
reach  the  development  which  the  Social  Democrats  foresaw, 
Soviet  leaders  conclude  that  social  democracy  in  the  West,  as 
well,  is  unreal  and  “treacherous.” 

This  is  also  true  with  regard  to  their  evaluation  of  the  basic 
conflict— the  conflict  between  systems,  or  the  basic  tendency 
toward  the  unification  of  production.  Here  too  their  evaluation 
is  out  of  focus. 

They  declare  that  this  conflict  is  a  struggle  between  two  dif¬ 
ferent  social  systems.  In  one  of  them— theirs,  of  course— they 
state  that  there  are  no  classes,  or  that  the  classes  are  in  the 
process  of  liquidation,  and  that  theirs  is  state  ownership.  In 
the  other  system— the  foreign  one— they  insist  that  there  are 
raging  class  struggles  and  crises  while  all  material  goods  are 
in  the  hands  of  private  individuals,  and  that  the  government  is 
only  the  tool  of  a  handful  of  greedy  monopolists.  With  this 


THE  PRESENT-DAY  WORLD 


213 


view  of  the  world,  they  believe  that  the  present  conflicts  would 
have  been  avoided  if  such  relationships  had  not  been  predomi¬ 
nant  in  the  West. 

That  is  where  the  difficulty  lies. 

Even  if  relationships  in  the  West  were  the  way  the  Com¬ 
munists  would  like  them  to  be— the  conflict  would  still  continue. 
Perhaps  the  conflict  would  be  even  more  severe  in  this  case. 
For  not  only  forms  of  ownership  would  differ;  it  would  be  a 
matter  of  different,  opposing  aspirations,  behind  which  stand 
modem  technology  and  the  vital  interests  of  whole  nations,  in 
which  various  groups,  parties,  dnd  classes  endeavor  to  have  the 
same  problem  solved  according  to  their  needs. 

When  the  Soviet  leaders  rate  the  modem  Western  countries 
as  blind  instruments  of  the  monopolies,  they  are  just  as  wrong 
as  they  are  in  interpreting  their  own  system  as  a  classless 
society  where  ownership  is  in'  the  hands  of  society.  Certainly 
the  monopolies  play  an  important  role  in  the  politics  of  the 
Western  countries,  but  in  no  case  is  the  role  as  great  or  the 
same  as  before  the  First  World  War,  nor  even  as  before  the 
Second  World  War.  There  is,  in  the  background,  something 
new  and  more  essential;  an  irresistible  aspiration  toward  the 
unification  of  the  world.  This  is  now  expressed  more  strongly 
through  statism  and  nationalization— or  through  the  role  of 
the  government  in  the  economy— than  it  is  through  the  influ¬ 
ence  and  action  of  the  monopolies. 

To  the  extent  that  one  class,  party,  or  leader  stifles  criticism 
completely,  or  holds  absolute  pwwer,  it  or  he  inevitably  falls 
into  an  unrealistic,  egotistical,  and  pretentious  judgment  of 
reality. 

This  is  happening  today  to  the  Communist  leaders.  They 
do  not  control  their  deeds,  but  are  forced  into  them  by  reality. 
There  are  advantages  in  this;  they  are  now  more  practical  men 
than  they  used  to  be.  However,  there  are  also  disadvantages, 
because  these  leaders  basically  lack  realistic,  or  even  approxi¬ 
mately  realistic,  views.  They  spend  more  time  defending 


214 


THE  NEW  CLASS 


themselves  from  world  reality  and  attacking  it  than  they  do 
in  getting  accustomed  to  it.  Their  adherence  to  obsolete  dogma 
incites  them  to  senseless  actions,  from  which,  on  more  mature 
thoughts,  they  constantly  retreat,  but  with  bloody  heads.  Let  us 
hope  that  the  latter  will  prevail  with  them.  Certainly,  if  the 
Communists  interpreted  the  world  realistically,  they  might  lose, 
but  they  would  gain  as  human  beings,  as  part  of  the  human  race. 

In  any  case,  the  world  will  change  and  will  go  in  the  direc¬ 
tion  in  which  it  has  been  moving  and  must  go  on— toward 
greater  unity,  progress,  and  freedom.  The  power  of  reality  and 
the  power  of  life  have  always  been  stronger  than  any  kind  of 
brutal  force  and  more  real  than  any  theory. 


